455

THE BHAGAVADGiTA
or

THE SONG DIVINE
(With Sanskrit Text and English Translation)

Gita Press, Gorakhpur
India

Thirty-eighth Reprint
Total

2007

15,000

10,42,625

Price : Rs. 6
( Six Rupees only)

ISBN 81-293-0437-6

Printed & Published by :

Gita Press, Gorakhpur--273005 (INDIA)
(a unit of Gobind Bhavan-Karyalaya, Kolkata)

Phone - (0551) 2334721; Fax - (0551) 2336997
e-mail : booksales@gitapress.org website : www.gitapress.org

Publisheris Note
As a book of scripture, the Bhagavadgdta has
assumed a position of universal interest. Its
teachings have gained appreciation not only in
India, but far beyond its borders, Our Gdta-Library
alone comprises about 1400 editions of the
Bhagavadgdta published in 34 different languages
including 8 foreign languages. This is our humble
attempt for bringing out this English edition of
the Gdta in pocket-size and in a popular form. We
trust it will find favour with the English-reading
public. The English translation of this edition
has been based on the Hindi rendering of the Gdta
made by Syt. Jayadayal Goyandka appearing in
the Gdta-Tattva Number of the Hindi monthly
eKalyani, published by the Gita Press. In preparing
the present English translation, the translators
have made use, every now and then, of other
English translations of the Gdta, and we express
our grateful acknowledgement for the same.
In order to add to the utility of this small volume
an introduction by Syt. Jayadayal Goyandka and
a synopsis of the Gdta have been prefixed to the
translation and an article by the same author
bearing on the Gdta has been appended thereto.

Z

o Publisher

The Greatness of The Gdta
Truly speaking, none has power to describe in
words the glory of the Gdta, for it is a book
containing the highest esoteric doctrines. It is the
essence of the Vedas; its language is so sweet and
simple that man can easily understand it after a
little practice; but the thoughts are so deep that
none can arrive at their end even after constant
study throughout a lifetime. Everyday they exhibit
new facets of Truth, therefore they remain ever
fresh and new. When scrutinized with a
concentrated mind, possessed of faith and
reverence, every verse of the Gdta will clearly
appear as full of the deepest mystery. The manner
in which the Gdta describes the virtues, glory and
secrets of God, is hardly found in any other
scripture; for in other books, the teachings are
generally mixed up, more or less, with worldly
subjects; but the Gdta uttered by the Lord is such
an incomparable book that not a word will be
found in it, which is devoid of some spiritual
import. That is why rd Vedavyasa, after describing
the Gdta in the Mahabharata, said in the end:o

The Gdta should be carefully studied, i.e., after
reading the text, its meaning and idea should be
gathered and held in the mind. It emanated from

(6)

the lotus-like lips of Bhagavan Vifiu Himself,
from whose navel sprung the lotus. What is the
use of studying the other elaborate scriptures?
Moreover, the Lord Himself also described its
glory at the end of the Gdta (Vide Chapter XVIII
verses 68 to 71).
All men, irrespective of Varfia and Arama,
possess the right to study the Gdta; the only
qualifications needed are faith and reverence, for
it is Godis injunction to propagate the Gdta only
among His devotees, and He further said that
women, Vaiyas, uudras and even men born of
sinful wombs can attain the supreme state of
salvation, if they cultivate devotion to Him. And
through worship of Him by the performance of
their own nature-born duties, men can attain
perfection (Chapter XVIII verse 46). Reflection
on these verses make it clear that all men have
equal right to God-realization.
But owing to lack of understanding of the truth
behind this subject, many persons who have only
heard the name of the Gdta, make this assertion
that the book is intended only for monks and
ascetics, and they refrain from placing the book
for study before their children out of fear lest
through knowledge of the Gdta the latter
renounce their hearths and homes and turn ascetics
themselves. But they should consider the fact that
Arjuna, who had, due to infatuation, prepared
himself to turn away from the duty of a Katriya

(7)

and live on alms, being influenced by the most
secret and mysterious teachings of the Gdta, lived
the life of a householder all his life and performed
his duties; how can that very Gdta produce this
diametrically opposite result?
Therefore, men who desire their own welfare
should give up this delusion and with utmost faith
and reverence induce their children to study the
Gdta understanding the meaning and the underlying
idea of every verse, and while studying and
reflecting on it themselves, should, according to
the injunction of the Lord, earnestly take to
spiritual practice. For obtaining this most valuable
human body, it is improper to waste even a single
moment of oneis time in indulging in transient
enjoyments, the roots of sorrow.

Principal Teachings of the Gdta
For His own realization, God has laid down in
the Gdta two principal wayso(1) Sankhyayoga,
and (2) Karmayoga. Of theseo
(1) All objects being unreal like the water in
a mirage, or the creation of a dream, Gufias, which
are the products of Maya, move in the Gufias,
understanding this, the sense of doership should
be lost with regard to all activities of the mind,
senses and the body (Chapter V verses 8-9), and
being established ever in identity with allpervading God, the embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss, consciousness should be

(8)

lost of the existence of any other being but God.
This is the practice of Sankhyayoga.
(2) Regarding everything as belonging to God,
maintaining equanimity in success or failure, renouncing
attachment and the desire for fruit, all works should
be done according to Godis behests and only for
the sake of God (Chapter II verse 48; Chapter V
verse 10); and, with utmost faith and reverence,
surrendering oneself to God through mind, speech
and body, constant meditation on Godis Form with
remembrance of His names, virtues and glory,
should be practised (Chapter VI verse 47). This is
the practice of Yoga by disinterested action.
The result of both these practices being the
same, they are regarded as one in reality (Chapter
V verses 4-5). But during the period of practice,
they being different according to the qualifications
of the Sadhaka, the two paths have been separately
described (Chapter III verse 3). Therefore, the
same man cannot tread both the paths at one and
the same time, even as though there may be two
roads to the Ganges, a person cannot proceed by
both the paths at the same time. Out of these,
Karmayoga cannot be practised in the stage of
Sannyasa, for in that stage renunciation of Karma
in every form has been advised. The practice
of Sankhyayoga, however, is possible in every
Arama, or stage of life.
If it is argued that the Lord has described
Sankhyayoga as synonymous with Sannyasa,

(9)

therefore, Sannyasds or monks alone are entitled to
practise it, and not householders, the argument is
untenable, because in the course of His description
of Sankhyayoga in Chapter II verses 11 to 30, the
Lord, here and there, showed to Arjuna that he
was qualified to fight, even according to that
standard. If householders were ever disqualified
for Sankhyayoga, how could these statements of
the Lord be reconciled? True, there is this special
saving clause that the Sadhaka qualified for the
path of Sankhya should be devoid of identification
with the body; for so long as there is identification
of the ego with the body, the practice of
Sankhyayoga cannot be properly understood. That
is why the Lord described the practice of
Sankhyayoga as difficult (Chapter V verse 6) and
disinterested Karmayoga, being easier of practice,
the Lord exhorted Arjuna, every now and then, to
practise it, together with constant meditation on him.

iWe bow to that Supreme Purua, Narayafia,
who is extolled even by great gods like Brahma,
Varufia (the god of water), Indra (the god of rain),

(10)

Rudra (the god of destruction), and the Maruts
(the wind-gods) through celestial hymns; whose
glories are sung by those proficient in chanting
the Samaveda through the Vedas along with the
six Angas (branches of knowledge auxiliary to the
Vedas), Pada (division of the Vedic text into
separate words), Krama and Jaa (particular forms
of reciting the Vedas) and the Upaniads; who is
perceived by the Yogds by means of their mind
made steady through meditation and fixed on the
Lord; and whose reality is not known even to
gods and Asuras.i

iObeisance to Vifiu, the dispeller of the fear
of rebirths, the one Lord of all the regions,
possessed of a tranquil form, lying on a bed of
snake, from whose navel has sprung the lotus, the
Lord of all celestials, the support of
the universe, similar to the sky, possessed of the
colour of a cloud and possessed of handsome
limbs, the Lord of Lakmd (the Goddess of Wealth),
having lotus-like eyes, and realized by Yogds in
meditation.i

oJayadayal Goyandka

Synopsis of the Gdta
No. of Verse

Subject Discussed

Chapter I entitled
iThe Yoga of Dejection of Arjunai
11o11 Description of the principal warriors
on both sides with their fighting qualities.
12o19 Blowing of conches by the warriors on
both sides.
20o27Arjuna observes the warriors drawn up
for battle.
28o47Overwhelmed by infatuation, Arjuna
gives expression to his faint-heartedness,
tenderness and grief.
Chapter II entitled
iSankhyayogai (the Yoga of Knowledge)
21o10 Arjuna and rd Kaefia discussing
Arjunais faint-heartedness.
11o30Sankhyayoga (the Yoga of Knowledge)
described.

(12)

No. of Verse

Subject Discussed

31o38 The Katriyais duty to engage himself
in fight.
39o53 Karmayoga (the Yoga of Selfless
Action) described.
54o72Marks of the man of stable mind and
his glories described.
Chapter III entitled
iKarmayoga, or the Yoga of Actioni
21o8 Importance of the performance of duty,
in a detached way, according to both
Janayoga and Karmayoga.
9o16 The necessity of performing sacrifices,
etc.
17o24 The necessity for action on the part
of the wise, and even on the part of
God Himself, for the good of the world.
25o35 Marks of the wise and the unwise;
instruction about performance of action
without attraction and repulsion.
36o43How to overcome desire.
Chapter IV entitled
iThe Yoga of Knowledge as well as the
disciplines of Action and Knowledgei
1o18 The glory of God with attributes;

(13)

No. of Verse

Subject Discussed

Karmayoga, or selfless action, described.
19o23 The conduct of Yogds and sages,
its glory described.
24o32Different forms of sacrifices described
with their fruits.
33o42The glory of Knowledge described.
Chapter V entitled
iThe Yoga of Action and Knowledgei
1o6 Sankhyayoga and the Yoga of
disinterested action described.
7o12 Marks of the Sankhyayogd and Nikama
Karmayogdotheir glories described.
13o26 Janayoga, or the Yoga of Knowledge.
27o29 Dhyanayoga, or meditation, together with
Devotion, described.
Chapter VI entitled
iThe Yoga of Self-Controli
1o 4 Karmayoga, or the Yoga of disinterested
Action, described; marks of one who
has attained Yoga.
5o10 Urging one to uplift the self; marks of
the God-realized soul.
11o32Detailed description of Dhyanayoga.

(14)

No. of Verse

Subject Discussed

33o36 The question of Mind-control discussed.
37o 47The fate of one who falls from Yoga;
the glory of Dhyanayoga described.
Chapter VII entitled
iThe Yoga of Jana (Knowledge of
Nirgufia Brahma) and Vijana
(Knowledge of Manifest Divinity)i
1o7 Wisdom with real Knowledge of
Manifest Divinity.
8o12 Inherence of God in all objects as their
Cause.
13o19 Condemnation of men of demoniacal
nature and praise of devotees.
20o23The question of worship of other gods.
24o30Condemnation of men, who are ignorant
of the glory and true nature of God, and
approbation of those who know them.
Chapter VIII entitled
iThe Yoga of the Indestructible Brahmai
1o7 Answer to Arjunais seven questions
on Brahma, Adhyatma and Karma
(Action), etc.
8o22 The subject of Bhaktiyoga discussed.
23o28 The bright and dark paths described.

(15)

No. of Verse

Subject Discussed

Chapter IX entitled
iThe Yoga of Sovereign Science and
the Sovereign Secret.i
1o6 The subject of Jana (Knowledge)
with its glory described.
7o10 The origin of the world discussed.
11o15 Condemnation of men of the demoniacal
nature, who despise God, and the method
of Bhajana of men possessed of the
divine nature.
16o19Description of God, as the soul of
everything, and His glory.
20o25The fruits of worship with a motive
and without motive.
26o34The glory of Devotion practised
disinterestedly.
Chapter X entitled
iThe Yoga of Divine Gloriesi
1o7 Description of Godis glories and power
of Yoga with the fruit of their knowledge.
8o11 Bhaktiyogaoits fruit and glory.
12o18 Arjuna offers his praises to God and
prays to the Lord for a description of
His glories and power of Yoga.
19o42The Lord describes His glories and power
of Yoga.

(16)

No. of Verse

Subject Discussed

Chapter XI entitled
iThe Yoga of the Vision of the Universal Formi
1o4 Arjuna prays to the Lord for a vision
of His Universal Form.
5o8 The Lord describes His Universal Form.
9o14 The Universal Form described by
Sajaya to Dhaetarara.
15o31 Arjuna sees the Lordis Universal Form
and offers praises to the Lord.
32o34 God describes His glory and exhorts
Arjuna to fight.
35o46Overtaken by fright, Arjuna offers
praises to God, and prays for a sight
of the Lordis Four-armed Form.
47o50 The Lord describes the glory of the
vision of His Universal Form, and
reveals to Arjuna His Four-armed, gentle
Form.
51o55 The impossibility of obtaining a sight
of the Four-armed Form without
exclusive Devotion, which is described
with its fruit.
Chapter XII entitled
iThe Yoga of Devotioni
1o12 Respective merits of the worshippers

(17)

No. of Verse

Subject Discussed

of God with Form and without Form,
and the means of God-realization.
13o20 Marks of the God-realized soul.
Chapter XIII entitled
iThe Yoga of Discrimination between
the Field and the Knower of the Fieldi
1o18 The subject of iFieldi and the Knower
of the iFieldi, together with Knowledge.
19o34 The subject of Prakaeti and Purua (Matter
and Spirit) together with knowledge.
Chapter XIV entitled
iThe Yoga of Division of
three Gufiasi
1o4 The glory of Knowledge; evolution of
the world from Prakaeti and Purua.
5o18 The qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas
described.
19o27 Means of God-realization, and marks of
the soul who has transcended the Gufias.
Chapter XV entitled
iThe Yoga of the Supreme Personi
1o6 Description of the Universe as a tree
and the means of God-realization.

(18)

No. of Verse

Subject Discussed

7o11 The Jdvatma, or individual soul.
12o15 God and His Glory described.
16o20 The perishable (bodies of all beings),
the imperishable (Jdvatma) and the
Supreme Person.
Chapter XVI entitled iThe Yoga of
Division between the Divine
and the Demoniacal Propertiesi
1o5 The Divine and the demoniacal
properties described with their fruit.
6o20 Marks of man possessed of the
demoniacal properties and their
damnation described.
21o24 Instruction
about
renouncing
conduct opposed to the scriptures and
exhortation to follow the scriptures.
Chapter XVII entitled
iThe Yoga of the Division of the
Threefold Faithi
1o6 Discussion on Faith and on the fate of
men who perform austere penance not
enjoined by the scriptures.
7o22 Different kinds of food, sacrifice,
penance and charity described.

(19)

No. of Verse

Subject Discussed

23o28 The meaning and intention of uttering
iOh Tat Sati explained.
Chapter XVIII entitled
iThe Yoga of Liberation through the
Path of Knowledge and Self-Surrenderi
1o12 The subject of Tyaga or Relinquishment.
13o18 Causes of Karma according to the
Sankhya system.
19o40Classification of knowledge, action,
doer, reason, firmness and joy according
to the three Gufias.
41o48 Duties attaching to each caste and the
fruit of their performance.
49o55 The path of Knowledge described.
56o66The path of Karmayoga, or selfless
action, together with Devotion.
67o78 The glory of the Gdta described.
God-realization through Practice
of Renunciation. ....... 205o224

Z

The Bhagavadgdta
The Song Divine
Chapter I

Dhaetarara said: Sajaya, gathered on the holy
land of Kuruketra, eager to fight, what did my
sons and the sons of PafiOEu do?
(1)

Sajaya said: At that time, seeing the army of
the PafiOEavas drawn up for battle and approaching
Drofiacarya, King Duryodhana spoke the following
words :
(2)

Behold, O Revered Master, the mighty army
of the sons of PafiOEu arrayed for battle by your
talented pupil, Dhaeadyumna, son of Drupada. (3)

22

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 1

There are in this army, heroes wielding mighty
bows and equal in military prowess to Bhdma and
ArjunaoSatyaki and Viraa and the Maharathd
(warrior chief) Drupada; Dhaeaketu, Cekitana and
the valiant King of Kad, and Purujit, Kuntibhoja,
and aibya, the best of men, and mighty
Yudhamanyu, and valiant Uttamauja, Abhimanyu,
the son of Subhadra, and the five sons of Draupaddo
all of them Maharathds (warrior chiefs). (4o6)

O best of Brahmafias, know them also who are
the principal warriors on our sideo the generals
of my army. For your information I mention
them.
(7)

iYourself and Bhdma and Karfia and Kaepa, who
is ever victorious in battle; and even so Avatthama,
Vikarfia and Bhuurirava (the son of Somadatta); (8)

Text 9o13]

Bhagavadgdta

23

And there are many other heroes, equipped with
various weapons and missiles, who have staked
their lives for me, all skilled in warfare.
(9)

This army of ours, fully protected by Bhdma,
is unconquerable; while that army of theirs, guarded
in everyway by Bhdma, is easy to conquer.(10)

Therefore, stationed in your respective positions
on all fronts, do you all guard Bhdma in particular
on all sides.
(11)

The grand old man of the Kaurava race, their
glorious grand-patriarch Bhdma, cheering up
Duryodhana, roared terribly like a lion and blew
his conch.
(12)

Then conchs, kettledrums, tabors, drums and
trumpets suddenly blared forth and the noise was
tumultuous.
(13)

24

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 1

Then, seated in a glorious chariot drawn by
white horses, rd Kaefia as well as Arjuna blew
their celestial conchs.
(14)

rd Kaefia blew His conch named Pacajanya;
Arjuna, Devadatta; while Bhdma of ferocious deeds
blew his mighty conch PaufiOEra.
(15)

King Yudhihira, son of Kuntd, blew his conch
Anantavijaya, while Nakula and Sahadeva blew
theirs, known as Sughoa and Mafiipupaka
respectively.
(16)

And the excellent archer, the King of Kad, and
ikhafiOEd the Maharathd (the great chariot-warrior),
Dhaeadyumna and Viraa, and invincible Satyaki,
Drupada as well as the five sons of Draupadd, and
the mighty-armed Abhimanyu, son of Subhadra,
all of them, O lord of the earth, severally blew
their respective conchs from all sides. (17-18)

Text 19o23]

Bhagavadgdta

25

And the terrible sound, echoing through heaven
and earth, rent the hearts of Dhaetararais army. (19)

Now, O lord of the earth, seeing your sons
arrayed against him and when missiles were ready
to be hurled, Arjuna, who had the figure of
Hanuman on the flag of his chariot, took up his
bow and then addressed the following words to
rd Kaefia; iKaefia, place my chariot between the
two armies.
(20-21)

iAnd keep it there till I have carefully observed
these warriors drawn up for battle, and have seen
with whom I have to engage in this fight. (22)

iI shall scan the well-wishers of evil-minded
Duryodhana, in this war whoever have assembled
on his side and are ready for the fight.i
(23)

26

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 1

Sajaya said: O king, thus addressed by Arjuna,
rd Kaefia placed the magnificent chariot between
the two armies in front of Bhdma, Drofia and all
the kings and said, iArjuna, behold these Kauravas
assembled here.i
(24-25)

H 26H
Now Arjuna saw stationed there in both the
armies his uncles, grand-uncles and teachers, even
great grand-uncles, maternal uncles, brothers and
cousins, sons and nephews, and grand-nephews,
even so friends, fathers-in-law and well-wishers
as well.
(26 & first half of 27)

Seeing all the relations present there, Arjuna
was overcome with deep compassion and spoke
thus in sorrow.
(Second half of 27 and first half of 28)

Text 28o32]

Bhagavadgdta

27

Arjuna said: Kaefia, as I see these kinsmen arrayed
for battle, my limbs give way, and my mouth is
getting parched; nay, a shiver runs through my body
and hair stands on end.
(Second half of 28 and 29)

The bow, GafiOEdva, slips from my hand and
my skin too burns all over; my mind is whirling,
as it were, and I can no longer hold myself
steady.
(30)

And, Keava, I see such omens of evil, nor do I see
any good in killing my kinsmen in battle. (31)

Kaefia, I do not covet victory, nor kingdom,
nor pleasures. Govinda, of what use will kingdom
or luxuries or even life be to us!
(32)

28

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 1

Those very persons for whose sake we covet
the kingdom, luxuries and pleasuresnteachers,
uncles, sons and nephews and even so, granduncles and great grand-uncles, maternal uncles,
fathers-in-law, grand-nephews, brothers-in-law and
other relationsnare here arrayed on the battlefield
staking their lives and wealth.
(33-34)

O Slayer of Madhu, I do not want to kill them,
even though they slay me, even for the sovereignty
over the three worlds; how much the less for
the kingdom here on earth!
(35)

H 36H
Kaefia, how can we hope to be happy slaying
the sons of Dhaetarara; by killing even these
desperadoes, sin will surely accrue to us. (36)

Text 38o41]

Bhagavadgdta

29

Therefore, Kaefia, it does not behove us to kill
our relations, the sons of Dhaetarara. For, how can
we be happy after killing our own kinsmen? (37)

Even though these people, with their mind
blinded by greed, perceive no evil in destroying
their own race and no sin in treason to friends,
why should not we, O Kaefia, who see clearly the
sin accruing from the destruction of oneis family,
think of desisting from committing this foul
deed.
(38-39)

Age-long family traditions disappear with the
destruction of a family; and virtue having been
lost, vice takes hold of the entire race.
(40)

With the preponderance of vice, Kaefia, the
women of the family become corrupt; and with
the corruption of women, O descendant of Vaefii,
there ensues an intermixture of castes.
(41)

30

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 1

Progeny due to promiscuity damns the
destroyers of the race as well as the race itself.
Deprived of the offerings of rice and water (raddha,
Tarpafia etc.,) the manes of their race also fall. (42)

Through these evils bringing about an
intermixture of castes, the age-long caste traditions
and family customs of the killers of kinsmen get
extinct.
(43)

Kaefia, we hear that men who have lost their
family traditions dwell in hell for an indefinite
period of time.
(44)

Oh what a pity! Though possessed of intelligence
we have set our mind on the commission of a
great sin; that due to lust for throne and enjoyment
we are intent on killing our own kinsmen. (45)

Text 47]

Bhagavadgdta

31

It would be better for me if the sons of
Dhaetarara, armed with weapons, kill me in battle,
while I am unarmed and unresisting.
(46)

Sajaya said: Arjuna, whose mind was agitated
by grief on the battlefield, having spoken thus,
and having cast aside his bow and arrows, sank
into the hinder part of his chariot.
(47)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
first chapter entitled iThe Yoga of Dejection of
Arjuna.i

Z

Chapter II

Sajaya said : rd Kaefia then addressed the
following words to Arjuna, who was, as mentioned
before, overwhelmed with pity, whose eyes were
filled with tears and agitated, and who was full
of sorrow.
(1)

H 2H

rd Bhagavan said : Arjuna, how has this
infatuation overtaken you at this odd hour? It is
shunned by noble souls; neither will it bring
heaven, nor fame to you.
(2)

Yield not to unmanliness, Arjuna; this does
not become you. Shaking off this base faintheartedness stand-up, O scorcher of enemies.(3)

Text 5o7]

Bhagavadgdta

33

Arjuna said : How Kaefia, shall I fight Bhdma
and Drofia with arrows on the battlefield? They
are worthy of deepest reverence, O destroyer of
foes.
(4)

It is better to live on alms in this world without
slaying these noble elders, because even after
killing
them we shall after all enjoy only
bloodstained pleasures in the form of wealth and
sense-enjoyments.
(5)

We do not even know which is preferable for
usoto fight or not to fight; nor do we know whether
we shall win or whether they will conquer us. Those
very sons of Dhaetarara, killing whom we do not
even wish to live, stand in the enemy ranks. (6)

Bhagavadgdta

34

[Ch. 2

With my very being smitten by the vice of
faint-heartedness and my mind puzzled with regard
to duty, I beseech You! tell me that which is
decidedly good; I am your disciple. Pray, instruct
me, who have taken refuge in You.
(7)

For even on obtaining undisputed sovereignty
and an affluent kingdom on this earth and lordship
over the gods, I do not see any means that
can drive away the grief which is drying up my
senses.
(8)

Sajaya said : O King, having thus spoken
to rd Kaefia, Arjuna again said to Him, iI will
not fight,i and became silent. (9)

fl--H 10H

Then, O Dhaetarara, rd Kaefia, as if smiling
addressed the following words to grieving Arjuna
in the midst of the two armies.
(10)

Text 11o15]

Bhagavadgdta

35

rd Bhagavan said: Arjuna, you grieve over
those who should not be grieved for and yet speak
like the learned; wise men do not sorrow over the
dead or the living.
(11)

In fact, there was never a time when I was not,
or when you or these kings were not. Nor is it a
fact that hereafter we shall all cease to be. (12)

Just as boyhood, youth and old age are
attributed to the soul through this body, even so
it attains another body. The wise man does not
get deluded about this.
(13)

E/UAH 14H
O son of Kuntd, the contacts between the senses
and their objects, which give rise to the feelings of
heat and cold, pleasure and pain etc., are transitory
and fleeting; therefore, Arjuna, endure them. (14)

36

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 2

Arjuna, the wise man to whom pain and pleasure
are alike, and who is not tormented by these
contacts, becomes eligible for immortality. (15)

The unreal has no existence, and the real never
ceases to be; the reality of both has thus been
perceived by the seers of Truth.
(16)

Know that alone to be imperishable which
pervades this universe; for no one has power to
destroy this indestructible substance.
(17)

E/UAH 18H
All these bodies pertaining to the imperishable,
indefinable and eternal soul are spoken of as
perishable; therefore, Arjuna, fight.
(18)

Both of them are ignorant, he who considers the
soul to be capable of killing and he who takes it as
killed; for verily the soul neither kills, nor is killed. (19)

Text 21o24]

Bhagavadgdta

37

The soul is never born, nor it ever dies; nor
does it become only after being born. For, it is
unborn, eternal, everlasting and primeval; even
though the body is slain, the soul is not. (20)

Arjuna, the man who knows this soul to be
imperishable; eternal and free from birth and
decayohow and whom will he cause to be killed,
how and whom will he kill?
(21)

As a man shedding worn-out garments, takes
other new ones, likewise, the embodied soul, casting
off worn-out bodies, enters into others that are
new.
(22)

Weapons cannot cut it nor can fire burn it;
water cannot wet it nor can wind dry it. (23)

For this soul is incapable of being cut, or burnt
by fire; nor can it be dissolved by water and is undriable
by air as well; This soul is eternal, omnipresent,
immovable, constant and everlasting.
(24)

38

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 2

This soul is unmanifest; it is incomprehensible
and it is spoken of as immutable. Therefore,
knowing it as such, you should not grieve. (25)

And, Arjuna, if you should suppose this soul
to be subject to constant birth and death, even
then you should not grieve like this.
(26)

For, in that case death is certain for the born,
and rebirth is inevitable for the dead. You should
not, therefore, grieve over the inevitable. (27)

Arjuna, before birth beings are not manifest to
our human senses; on death they return to the
unmanifest again. They are manifest only in the
interim between birth and death. What occasion,
then, for lamentation?
(28)

Text 30o34]

Bhagavadgdta

39

Hardly anyone perceives this soul as marvellous,
scarce another likewise speaks thereof as
marvellous, and scarce another hears of it as
marvellous, while there are some who know it
not even on hearing of it.
(29)

Arjuna, this soul dwelling in the bodies of
all, can never be slain; therefore, you should not
mourn for anyone.
(30)

Besides, considering your own duty too, you
should not waver, for there is nothing more
welcome for a man of the warrior class than a
righteous war.
(31)

Arjuna, happy are the Katriyas who get such
an unsolicited opportunity for war, which is an
open gateway to heaven.
(32)

Now, if you refuse to fight this righteous war,
then, shirking your duty and losing your reputation,
you will incur sin.
(33)

40

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 2

Nay, people will also pour undying infamy on
you; and infamy brought on a man enjoying
popular esteem is worse than death.
(34)

And the warrior-chiefs who thought highly of
you, will now despise you, thinking that it was
fear which drove you away from battle.
(35)

And your enemies, disparaging your might, will
speak many unbecoming words; what can be more
distressing than this?
(36)

Die, and you will win heaven; conquer, and
you enjoy sovereignty of the earth; therefore, stand
up, Arjuna, determined to fight.
(37)

Treating alike victory and defeat, gain and
loss, pleasure and pain, get ready for the battle;
fighting thus you will not incur sin.
(38)

Arjuna, this attitude of mind has been presented

Text 40o44]

Bhagavadgdta

41

to you from the point of view of Janayoga; now
hear the same as presented from the standpoint of
Karmayoga (the Yoga of selfless action). Equipped
with this attitude of mind, you will be able to
throw off completely the shackles of Karma. (39)

In this path (of disinterested action) there is
no loss of effort, nor is there fear of contrary result,
even a little practice of this discipline saves one
from the terrible fear of birth and death. (40)

Arjuna, in this Yoga (of disinterested action)
the intellect is determinate and directed singly
towards one ideal; whereas the intellect of the
undecided (ignorant men moved by desires) wanders
in all directions, after innumerable aims. (41)

Arjuna, those who are full of worldly desires and
devoted to the letter of the Vedas, who look upon
heaven, as the supreme goal and argue that there
is nothing beyond heaven are unwise. They utter

42

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 2

flowery speech recommending many rituals of various
kinds for the attainment of pleasure and power with
rebirth as their fruit. Those whose minds are carried
away by such words, and who are deeply attached
to pleasures and worldly power, cannot attain the
determinate intellect concentrated on God. (42o44)

Arjuna, the Vedas thus deal with the evolutes
of the three Gufias (modes of Prakaeti), viz., worldly
enjoyments and the means of attaining such enjoyments; be thou indifferent to these enjoyments and
their means, rising above pairs of opposites like
pleasure and pain etc., established in the Eternal
Existence (God), absolutely unconcerned about the
fulfilment of wants and the preservation of what has
been already attained, and self-controlled. (45)

A Brahmafia, who has obtained enlightenment,
has as much use for all the Vedas as one who
stands at the brink of a sheet of water overflowing
on all sides has for a small reservoir of water. (46)

Your right is to work only and never to the fruit
thereof. Do not be the cause of the fruit of action;
nor let your attachment be to inaction.
(47)

Text 48o52]

Bhagavadgdta

43

Arjuna, perform your duties established in
Yoga, renouncing attachment, and be even-minded
in success and failure; evenness of mind is
called eYogai.
(48)

Action with a selfish motive is far inferior to
this Yoga in the form of equanimity. Do seek refuge
in this equipoise of mind, Arjuna; for poor and
wretched are those who are instrumental in making
their actions bear fruit.
(49)

Endowed with equanimity, one sheds in this
life both good and evil. Therefore, strive for the
practice of this Yoga of equanimity. Skill in action
lies in the practice of this Yoga. (50)

For, wise men possessing equipoised mind,
renouncing the fruit of actions and freed from the
shackles of birth, attain the blissful supreme state. (51)

When your mind will have fully crossed the
mire of delusion, you will then grow indifferent

44

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 2

to the enjoyments of this world and the next
that have been heard of as well as to those that
are yet to be heard of.
(52)

When your intellect, confused by hearing
conflicting statements, will rest steady and
undistracted in meditation on God, you will then
attain Yoga (everlasting union with God). (53)

Arjuna said : Kaefia, what is the definition
(mark) of a God-realized soul, stable of mind
and established in Samadhi (perfect tranquillity
of mind)? How does the man of stable mind speak,
how does he sit, how does he walk?
(54)

rd Bhagavan said: Arjuna, when one thoroughly
casts off all cravings of the mind, and is satisfied
in the Self through the joy of the Self, he is then
called stable of mind.
(55)

The sage, whose mind remains unperturbed amid
sorrows, whose thirst for pleasures has altogether

Text 57o61]

Bhagavadgdta

45

disappeared, and who is free from passion, fear
and anger, is called stable of mind.
(56)

He who is unattached to everything, and meeting
with good and evil, neither rejoices nor recoils,
his mind is stable.
(57)

When, like a tortoise, that draws in its limbs
from all directions, he withdraws all his senses from
the sense-objects, his mind becomes steady. (58)

Sense-objects turn away from him, who does not
enjoy them with his senses; but the taste for them
persists. This relish also disappears in the case of
the man of stable mind when he realizes the Supreme. (59)

Turbulent by nature, the senses (not free from
attachment) even of a wise man, who is practising
self-control, forcibly carry away his mind, Arjuna.(60)

Therefore, having controlled all the senses and
concentrating his mind, he should sit for
meditation, devoting himself heart and soul to Me.

46

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 2

For, he whose senses are under his control, is
known to have a stable mind.
(61)

The man dwelling on sense-objects develops attachment for them; from attachment springs up desire,
and from desire (unfulfilled) ensues anger. (62)

From anger arises delusion; from delusion,
confusion of memory; from confusion of memory,
loss of reason; and from loss of reason one goes
to complete ruin.
(63)

But the self-controlled Sadhaka, while enjoying
the various sense-objects through his senses,
which are disciplined and free from likes and
dislikes, attains placidity of mind.
(64)

With the attainment of such placidity of mind, all
his sorrows come to an end; and the intellect of such
a person of tranquil mind soon withdrawing itself
from all sides, becomes firmly established in God. (65)

Text 67o70]

Bhagavadgdta

47

He who has not controlled his mind and
senses can have no determinate intellect, nor
contemplation. Without contemplation, he can
have no peace; and how can there be happiness
for one lacking peace of mind?
(66)

As the wind carries away a boat upon the waters,
even so of the senses moving among sense-objects,
the one to which the mind is attached, takes away
his discrimination.
(67)

Therefore, Arjuna, he, whose senses are
completely restrained from their objects, is said
to have a stable mind.
(68)

That which is night to all beings, in that state
of Divine Knowledge and Supreme Bliss the Godrealized Yogd keeps awake, and that (the everchanging, transient worldly happiness) in which
all beings keep awake, is night to the seer. (69)

48

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 2

As the waters of different rivers enter the
ocean, which, though full on all sides, remains
undisturbed; likewise, he, in whom all enjoyments
merge themselves without causing disturbance,
attains peace; not he who hankers after such
enjoyments.
(70)

He who has given up all desires, and moves
free from attachment, egoism and thirst for
enjoyment attains peace.
(71)

Arjuna, such is the state of the God-realized
soul; having reached this state, he overcomes
delusion. And established in this state, even at
the last moment, he attains Brahmic Bliss. (72)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue
between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the second chapter
entitled iSankhyayogai (the Yoga of Knowledge).

Z

Chapter III

Arjuna said : Kaefia if You consider Knowledge
as superior to Action, why then do You urge me
to this dreadful action, Keava!
(1)

You are, as it were, puzzling my mind by these
seemingly conflicting expressions; therefore, tell
me the one definite discipline by which I may
obtain the highest good.
(2)

rd Bhagavan said: Arjuna, in this world two
courses of Sadhana (spiritual discipline) have been
enunciated by Me in the past. In the case of the
Sankhyayogd, the Sadhana proceeds along the path
of Knowledge; whereas in the case of the Karmayogd, it proceeds along the path of Action. (3)

50

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 3

Man does not attain freedom from action
(culmination of the discipline of Action) without
entering upon action; nor does he reach perfection
(culmination of the discipline of Knowledge)
merely by ceasing to act.
(4)

Surely, none can ever remain inactive even for
a moment; for, everyone is helplessly driven to
action by modes of Prakaeti.
(5)

He who outwardly restraining the organs of
sense and action, sits mentally dwelling on the
objects of senses, that man of deluded intellect is
called a hypocrite.
(6)

On the other hand, he who controlling the organs
of sense and action by the power of his will, and
remaining unattached, undertakes the Yoga of selfless
Action through those organs, Arjuna, he excels. (7)

Therefore, do you perform your allotted duty;
for action is superior to inaction. Desisting from
action, you cannot even maintain your body. (8)

Text 9o13]

Bhagavadgdta

51

Man is bound by his own action except when
it is performed for the sake of sacrifice. Therefore,
Arjuna, do you efficiently perform your duty, free
from attachment, for the sake of sacrifice alone. (9)

Having created mankind along with (the spirit
of) sacrifice at the beginning of creation, the creator,
Brahma, said to them, iYou shall prosper by this;
may this yield the enjoyments you seek.
(10)

Foster the gods through this sacrifice, and let
the gods be gracious to you. Thus, each fostering
the other selflessly, you will attain the highest
good.
(11)

Fostered by sacrifice, the gods will surely
bestow on you unasked all the desired enjoyments.
He who enjoys the gifts bestowed by them without
offering anything to them in return, is undoubtedly
a thief.
(12)

52

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 3

The virtuous who partake of what is left over
after sacrifice, are absolved of all sins. Those
sinful ones who cook for the sake of nourishing
their bodies alone, partake of sin only.
(13)

All beings are evolved from food; production
of food is dependent on rain; rain ensues from
sacrifice, and sacrifice is rooted in prescribed
action. Know that prescribed action has its
origin in the Vedas, and the Vedas proceed from
the Indestructible (God); hence the all-pervading
Infinite is always present in sacrifice. (14-15)

Arjuna, he who does not follow the wheel of
creation thus set going in this world i.e., does not
perform his duties, leads a sinful and sensual life,
he lives in vain.
(16)

He, however, who takes delight in the Self alone
and is gratified with the Self, and is contented in
the Self, has no duty.
(17)

Text 18o22]

Bhagavadgdta

53

In this world that great soul has nothing
to gain by action nor by abstaining from action;
nor has he selfish dependence of any kind on
any creature.
(18)

Therefore, go on efficiently doing your duty
at all times without attachment. Doing work
without attachment man attains the Supreme. (19)

It is through action without attachment alone
that Janaka and other wise men reached perfection.
Having in view the maintenance of the world order
too, you should take to action.
(20)

For whatever a great man does, that very thing
other men also do; whatever standard he sets up,
the generality of men follow the same.
(21)

Arjuna, there is no duty in all the three worlds
for Me to perform, nor is there anything worth
attaining, unattained by Me; yet I continue to
work.
(22)

54

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 3

Should I not engage in action, scrupulously at
any time, great harm will come to the world; for,
Arjuna, men follow My way in all matters. (23)

If I ever cease to act, these worlds would perish;
nay, I should prove to be the cause of confusion,
and of the destruction of these people.
(24)

H 25H
Arjuna, as the unwise act with attachment, so
should the wise man, with a view to maintain the
world order, act without attachment.
(25)

A wise man established in the Self should not
unsettle the mind of the ignorant attached to action,
but should get them to perform all their duties,
duly performing his own duties.
(26)

In fact all actions are being performed by the
modes of Prakaeti (Primordial Matter). The fool,
whose mind is deluded by egoism, thinks: iI am
the doer.i
(27)

Text 28o31]

Bhagavadgdta

55

However, he, who has true insight into the
respective spheres of Gufias (modes of Prakaeti) and
their actions, holding that it is the Gufias (in the
shape of the senses, mind, etc.,) that move among
the Gufias (objects of perception), does not get
attached to them, Arjuna.
(28)

Those who are completely deluded by the Gufias
(modes) of Prakaeti remain attached to those Gufias
and actions; the man of perfect Knowledge should
not unsettle the mind of those ignorants of
imperfect knowledge.
(29)

Therefore, dedicating all actions to Me with
your mind fixed on Me, the Self of all, freed from
desire and the feeling of meum and cured of mental
agitation, fight.
(30)

Even those men who, with an uncavilling
and devout mind, always follow this teaching
of Mine are released from the bondage of all
actions.
(31)

56

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 3

But they, however, who, finding fault with this
teaching of Mine, do not follow it, take those
fools to be deluded in the matter of all knowledge
as lost.
(32)

All living creatures follow their tendencies; even
the wise man acts according to the tendencies of
his own nature. Of what use is any external
restraint?
(33)

Attraction and repulsion are rooted in all senseobjects. Man should never allow himself to be
swayed by them, because they are the two principal
enemies standing in the way of his redemption. (34)

Oneis own duty, though devoid of merit, is preferable
to the duty of another well performed. Even death
in the performance of oneis own duty brings blessedness; anotheris duty is fraught with fear.
(35)

Text 37o41]

Bhagavadgdta

57

Arjuna said : Now impelled by what, Kaefia
does this man commit sin even involuntarily, as
though driven by force?
(36)

rd Bhagavan said : It is desire begotten of the
element of Rajas, which appears as wrath; nay, it
is insatiable and grossly wicked. Know this to be
the enemy in this case.
(37)

As fire is covered by smoke, mirror by dust,
and embryo by the amnion, so is knowledge
covered by desire.
(38)

And, Arjuna, Knowledge stands covered by this
eternal enemy of the wise known as desire, which
is insatiable like fire.
(39)

The senses, the mind and the intellect are declared
to be its seat; covering the knowledge through
these, it (desire) deludes the embodied soul. (40)

58

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 3

Therefore, Arjuna, you must first control your
senses, and then kill this evil thing which obstructs
Jana (Knowledge of the Absolute or Nirgufia
Brahma) and Vijana (Knowledge of Sakara
Brahma or manifest Divinity).
(41)

The senses are said to be greater than the
body; but greater than the senses is the mind.
Greater than the mind is the intellect; and what
is greater than the intellect is He, the Self. (42)

Thus, Arjuna, knowing the Self which is higher
than the intellect and subduing the mind by reason,
kill this enemy in the form of desire that is hard
to overcome.
(43)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord,
the Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga,
the dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna,
ends the third chapter entitled i4Karmayoga, or
the Yoga of Action.i

Z

Chapter IV

rd Bhagavan said: I revealed this immortal
Yoga to Vivasvan (Sun-god); Vivasvan conveyed
it to Manu (his son); and Manu imparted it to
(his son) Ikvaku.
(1)

Thus transmitted in succession from father to
son, Arjuna, this Yoga remained known to the
Rajaris (royal sages). Through long lapse of
time, this Yoga got lost to the world.
(2)

The same ancient Yoga, which is the supreme
secret, has this day been imparted to you by Me,
because you are My devotee and friend.
(3)

Arjuna said: You are of recent origin, while

60

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 4

the birth of Vivasvan dates back to remote antiquity.
How, then, am I to believe that You imparted this
Yoga at the beginning of the creation!
(4)

rd Bhagavan said : Arjuna, you and I have
passed through many births, I remember them all;
you do not remember, O chastiser of foes. (5)

Though birthless and immortal and the Lord
of all beings, I manifest Myself through My own
Yogamaya (divine potency), keeping My nature
(Prakaeti) under control.
(6)

Arjuna, whenever righteousness is on the
decline, unrighteousness is in the ascendant, then
I body Myself forth.
(7)

For the protection of the virtuous, for the
extirpation of evil-doers, and for establishing
Dharma (righteousness) on a firm footing, I manifest
Myself from age to age.
(8)

Text 9o13]

Bhagavadgdta

61

Arjuna, My birth and activities are divine. He
who knows this in reality is not reborn on leaving
his body, but comes to Me.
(9)

Completely rid of attachment, fear and anger,
wholly absorbed in Me, depending on Me, and
purified by the penance of wisdom, many have
become one with Me even in the past.
(10)

Arjuna, howsoever men seek Me, even so do
I respond to them; for all men follow My path in
everyway.
(11)

In this world of human beings, men seeking
the fruition of their activities, worship the gods;
for success born of actions follows quickly. (12)

The four orders of society (viz., the Brahmafia,
the Katriya, the Vaiya and the uudra) were
created by Me, classifying them according to the
Gufias predominant in each and apportioning

62

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 4

corresponding duties to them; though the originator
of this creation, know Me, the Immortal Lord, to
be a non-doer.
(13)

Since I have no craving for the fruit of actions,
actions do not taint Me. Even he who thus knows
Me in reality is not bound by actions.
(14)

Having known thus, action was performed even
by the ancient seekers for liberation; therefore,
do you also perform actions as have been performed
by the ancients from antiquity.
(15)

What is action and what is inaction? Even men
of intelligence are puzzled over this question.
Therefore, I shall expound to you the truth about
action, knowing which you will be freed from its
evil effects i.e., the shackles of karma.
(16)

The truth about action must be known and the
truth of inaction also must be known; even so,
the truth about prohibited action (Vikarma) must be
known. For, mysterious are the ways of action. (17)

Text 18o22]

Bhagavadgdta

63

He who sees inaction in action, and action in
inaction, is wise among men; he is a Yogd, who
has performed all actions.
(18)

Even the wise call him a sage, whose
undertakings are all free from desire and Sankalpa
(thoughts of the world) and whose actions are burnt
up by the fire of wisdom.
(19)

He, who, having totally given up attachment
to actions and their fruit, no longer depends on
anything in the world, and is ever content, does
nothing at all, though fully engaged in action. (20)

Having subdued his mind and body, and giving
up all objects of enjoyment, and free from craving,
he who performs sheer bodily action, does not
incur sin.
(21)

The

Karmayogd,

who

is

contented

with

Bhagavadgdta

64

[Ch. 4

whatever is got unsought, is free from jealousy
and has transcended all pairs of opposites like
joy and grief, and is balanced in success and
failure, is not bound by his action.
(22)

All his actions get dissolved entirely, who is
free from attachment and has no identification
with the body; and free from the feeling of mine,
whose mind is established in the knowledge of Self
and who works merely for the sake of sacrifice. (23)

In the practice of seeing Brahma everywhere as
a form of sacrifice, Brahma is the ladle (with which
oblation is poured into the fire, etc.); Brahma, again,
is the oblation; Brahma is the fire, Brahma itself is
the sacrificer and so Brahma itself constitutes the
act of pouring the oblation into the fire. And finally
Brahma is the goal to be reached by him who is
absorbed in Brahma as the act of such sacrifice. (24)

Other Yogds duly offer sacrifice only in the
shape of worship to gods, while others perform
sacrifice by offering the self by the Self itself in
the fire of Brahma through the sacrifice known
as the perception of identity.
(25)

Text 26o30]

Bhagavadgdta

65

Others offer as sacrifice their senses of hearing
etc., into the fires of self-discipline. Other Yogds,
again, offer sound and other objects of perception
into the fires of the senses.
(26)

Others sacrifice all the functions of their senses
and the functions of the vital airs (Prafia) into the
fire of Yoga in the shape of self-control, kindled
by wisdom.
(27)

Some perform sacrifice with material possessions;
some offer sacrifice in the shape of austerities;
others sacrifice through the practice of Yoga; while
some striving souls, observing austere vows,
perform sacrifice in the shape of wisdom through
the study of sacred texts.
(28)

Other Yogds offer the act of exhalation into

66

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 4

that of inhalation; even so, others the act of
inhalation into that of exhalation. There are still
others given to the practice of Prafiayama (breathcontrol), who having regulated their diet and
controlled the processes of exhalation and
inhalation both pour their vital airs into the vital
airs themselves. All these have their sins consumed
away by sacrifice and understand the meaning of
sacrificial worship.
(29-30)

Arjuna, Yogds who enjoy the nectar that has
been left over after the performance of a sacrifice
attain the eternal Brahma. To the man who does
not offer sacrifice, even this world is not happy;
how, then, can the other world be happy? (31)

Many such forms of sacrifice have been set
forth in detail in the Vedas; know them all as
involving the action of mind, senses and body.
Thus, knowing the truth about them you shall be
freed from the bondage of action (through their
performance).
(32)

Text 34o37]

Bhagavadgdta

67

Arjuna, sacrifice through Knowledge is superior
to sacrifice performed with material things. For
all actions without exception culminate in
Knowledge, O son of Kuntd.
(33)

Understand the true nature of that Knowledge
by approaching illumined soul. If you prostrate at
their feet, render them service, and question them
with an open and guileless heart, those wise seers
of Truth will instruct you in that Knowledge.(34)

Arjuna, when you have achieved enlightenment,
ignorance will delude you no more. In the light
of that knowledge, you will see the entire creation
first within your own Self, and then in Me (the
Oversoul).
(35)

Even if you were the most sinful of all sinners,
this Knowledge alone would carry you, like a raft,
across all your sins.
(36)

68

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 4

For, as the blazing fire turns the fuel to ashes,
Arjuna, even so the fire of Knowledge turns all
actions to ashes.
(37)

In this world there is no purifier as great as
Knowledge; he who has attained purity of heart
through prolonged practice of Karmayoga,
automatically sees the light of Truth in the self
in course of time.
(38)

He who has mastered his senses, is exclusively
devoted to his practice and is full of faith, attains
Knowledge; having had the revelation of Truth,
he immediately attains supreme peace in the form
of God-realization.
(39)

He who lacks discrimination, is devoid of faith,
and is at the same time possessed by doubt, is
lost to the spiritual path. For the doubting soul
there is neither this world nor the world beyond,
nor even happiness.
(40)

Text 41o 42]

Bhagavadgdta

69

Arjuna, actions do not bind him who has
dedicated all his actions to God according to the
spirit of Karmayoga, whose doubts have been
dispelled by wisdom and who is self-possessed. (41)

Therefore, Arjuna slashing to pieces, with the
sword of knowledge, this doubt in your heart, born
of ignorance, establish yourself in Karmayoga in
the shape of even-mindedness, and stand up for
the fight.
(42)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
fourth chapter entitled iThe Yoga of Knowledge
as well as the disciplines of Action and
Knowledge.i

Z

Chapter V

Arjuna said : Kaefia, you extol Sankhyayoga (the
Yoga of Knowledge) and then the Yoga of Action.
Pray, tell me which of the two is decidedly
conducive to my good.
(1)

rd Bhagavan said : The Yoga of Knowledge
and the Yoga of Action both lead to supreme Bliss.
Of the two, however, the Yoga of Action, being
easier of practice, is superior to the Yoga of
Knowledge.
(2)

The Karmayogd who neither hates nor desires
should ever be considered a man of renunciation.
For, Arjuna, he who is free from the pairs of opposites
is easily liberated from bondage.
(3)

Text 5o7]

Bhagavadgdta

71

It is the ignorant, not the wise, who say that
Sankhyayoga and Karmayoga lead to divergent
results. For, one who is firmly established in either,
gets the fruit of both which is the same, viz., Godrealization.
(4)

The (supreme) state which is reached by the
Sankhyayogd is attained also by the Karmayogd.
Therefore, he alone who sees Sankhyayoga and
Karmayoga as identical so far as their result goes,
sees truly.
(5)

Without Karmayoga, however, Sankhyayoga
i.e., renunciation of doership in relation to all
activities of the mind, senses and body is difficult
to accomplish; whereas the Karmayogd, who keeps
his mind fixed on God, reaches Brahma in no
time, Arjuna.
(6)

The Karmayogd, who has fully conquered his
mind and mastered his senses, whose heart is pure,
and who has identified himself with the Self of
all beings (viz., God), remains untainted, even
though performing action.
(7)

72

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 5

However, the Sankhyayogd, who knows the
reality of things, must believe that he does
nothing, even though seeing, hearing, touching,
smelling, eating or drinking, walking, sleeping,
breathing, speaking, answering the calls of nature,
grasping, and opening or closing the eyes, holding
that it is the senses alone that are moving among
their objects.
(8-9)

He who acts offering all actions to God, and
shaking off attachment, remains untouched by sin,
as the lotus leaf by water.
(10)

The Karmayogds perform action only
their senses, mind, intellect and body as
without the feeling of mine in respect of
and shaking off attachment, simply for the
of self-purification.

with
well,
them
sake
(11)

Text 13o16]

Bhagavadgdta

73

Offering the fruit of actions to God, the
Karmayogd attains everlasting peace in the shape
of God-realization; whereas, he who works with
a selfish motive, being attached to the fruit of
actions through desire, gets tied down.
(12)

The self-controlled Sankhyayogd, doing nothing
himself and getting nothing done by others, rests
happily in Godothe embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss, mentally relegating all
actions to the mansion of nine gates (the body
with nine openings).
(13)

God determines neither the doership nor the
doings of men, nor even their contact with the fruit
of actions; but it is Nature alone that functions. (14)

The omnipresent God does not partake the
virtue or sin of anyone. Knowledge is enveloped
by ignorance; hence it is that beings are
constantly falling a prey to delusion.
(15)

74

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 5

In the case, however, of those whose said
ignorance has been destroyed by true knowledge
of God, that wisdom shining like the sun reveals
the Supreme.
(16)

Those whose mind and intellect are wholly
merged in Him, who remain constantly established in
identity with Him, and have finally become one with
Him, their sins being wiped out by wisdom, reach
the supreme goal whence there is no return. (17)

The wise look with equanimity on all whether it
be a Brahmafia endowed with learning and culture,
a cow, an elephant, a dog and a pariah, too. (18)

Even here is the mortal plane conquered by those
whose mind is established in unity; since the
Absolute is untouched by evil and is the same to
all, hence they are established in the Eternal. (19)

He who, with firm intellect and free from doubt,
rejoices not on obtaining what is pleasant and
does not feel perturbed on meeting with the

Text 21o24]

Bhagavadgdta

75

unpleasant, that knower of Brahma lives eternally
in identity with Brahma.
(20)

He whose mind remains unattached to senseobjects, derives through meditation the Sattvika
joy which dwells in the mind; then that Yogd,
having completely identified himself through
meditation with Brahma, enjoys eternal Bliss. (21)

The pleasures which are born of sense-contacts
are verily a source of suffering only (though
appearing as enjoyable to worldly-minded people).
They have a beginning and an end (they come
and go); Arjuna, it is for this reason that a wise
man does not indulge in them. (22)

He alone, who is able to withstand, in this very
life before casting off this body, the urges of lust
and anger, is a Yogd, and he alone is a happy man. (23)

76

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 5

He who is happy within himself, enjoys within
himself the delight of the soul, and even so, is
illumined by the inner light (light of the soul),
such a Yogd (Sankhyayogd) identified with Brahma
attains Brahma, who is all peace.
(24)

The seers whose sins have been purged, whose
doubts have been dispelled by knowledge, whose
disciplined mind is firmly established in God and
who are devoted to the welfare of all beings, attain
Brahma, who is all peace.
(25)

To those wise men who are free from lust and
anger, who have subdued their mind and have
realized God, Brahma, the abode of eternal peace,
is present all-round.
(26)

Shutting out all thoughts of external
enjoyments, with the gaze fixed on the space

Text 29]

Bhagavadgdta

77

between the eye-brows, having regulated the
Prafia (outgoing) and the Apana (incoming)
breaths flowing within the nostrils, he who has
brought his senses, mind and intellect under
controlnsuch a contemplative soul intent on
liberation and free from desire, fear and anger,
is ever liberated.
(27-28)

Having known Me in reality as the enjoyer of
all sacrifices and austerities, the supreme Lord of
all the worlds, and the selfless friend of all beings,
My devotee attains peace.
(29)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord,
the Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
fifth chapter entitled iThe Yoga of Action and
Knowledge.i

Z

Chapter VI

rd Bhagavan said : He who does his duty
without expecting the fruit of actions is a Sannyasd
(Sankhyayogd) and a Yogd (Karmayogd) both. He
is no Sannyasd (renouncer) who has merely
renounced the sacred fire; even so, he is no Yogd
who has merely given up all activity.
(1)

Arjuna, you must know that what they call
Sannyasa is no other than Yoga; for none becomes
a Yogd, who has not abandoned his eSankalpasi
(thoughts of the world).
(2)

To the contemplative soul who desires to attain
Karmayoga, selfless action is said to be the means;
for the same man when he is established in Yoga,
absence of all eSankalpasi (thoughts of the world)
is said to be the way to blessedness.
(3)

Text 4o7]

Bhagavadgdta

79

When a man ceases to have any attachment
for the objects of senses and for actions, and has
renounced all eSankalpasi (thoughts of the world),
he is said to have attained Yoga.
(4)

One should lift oneself by oneis own efforts
and should not degrade oneself; for oneis own
self is oneis friend, and oneis own self is oneis
enemy.
(5)

Oneis own self is the friend of the soul by whom
the lower self (consisting of the mind, senses and
body) has been conquered; even so, the very self
of him, who has not conquered his lower self,
behaves antagonistically like an enemy.
(6)

The Supreme Spirit is rooted in the knowledge
of the self-controlled man whose mind is perfectly
serene in the midst of pairs of opposites, such as
cold and heat, joy and sorrow, and honour and
ignominy.
(7)

80

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 6

The Yogd whose mind is sated with Jana
(Knowledge of Nirgufia Brahma) and Vijana
(Knowledge of manifest Divinity), who is unmoved
under any circumstances, whose senses are
completely under control, and to whom earth, stone
and gold are all alike, is spoken of as a Godrealized soul.
(8)

He who looks upon well-wishers and neutrals
as well as mediators, friends and foes, relatives
and inimicals, the virtuous and the sinful with
equanimity, stands supreme.
(9)

Living in seclusion all by himself, the Yogd
who has controlled his mind and body, and is
free from desires and void of possessions, should
constantly engage his mind in meditation. (10)

Having firmly set his seat in a spot which is
free from dirt and other impurities with the sacred
Kua grass, a deerskin and a cloth spread thereon,
one upon the other, (Kua below, deerskin in the

Text 12o16]

Bhagavadgdta

81

middle and cloth uppermost), neither very high
nor very low.
(11)

And occupying that seat, concentrating the
mind and controlling the functions of the mind
and senses, he should practise Yoga for selfpurification.
(12)

Holding the trunk, head and neck straight and
steady, remaining firm and fixing the gaze on the tip
of his nose, without looking in other directions. (13)

Firm in the vow of complete chastity and
fearless, keeping himself perfectly calm and with
the mind held in restraint and fixed on Me, the
vigilant Yogd should sit absorbed in Me. (14)

Thus, constantly applying his mind to Me, the Yogd
of disciplined mind attains everlasting peace,
consisting of Supreme Bliss, which abides in Me. (15)

82

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 6

Arjuna, this Yoga is neither for him who
overeats, nor for him who observes complete
fast; it is neither for him who is given to too
much sleep, nor even for him who is ceaselessly
awake.
(16)

Yoga, which rids one of woe, is accomplished
only by him who is regulated in diet and
recreation, regulated in performing actions, and
regulated in sleep and wakefulness.
(17)

When the mind which is thoroughly disciplined
gets riveted on God alone, then the person who
is free from yearning for all enjoyments is said to
be established in Yoga.
(18)

As a flame does not flicker in a windless
place, such is stated to be the picture of the
disciplined mind of the Yogd practising meditation
on God.
(19)

The state in which, the Citta (mind-stuff)
subdued through the practice of Yoga, becomes

Text 21o24]

Bhagavadgdta

83

passive, and in which realizing God through
subtle reasoning purified by meditation on God;
the soul rejoices only in God;
(20)

Nay, in which the soul experiences the eternal
and super-sensuous joy which can be intuited only
through the subtle and purified intellect, and
wherein established the said Yogd moves not from
Truth on any account;
(21)

And having obtained which he does not reckon
any other gain as greater than that, and established
in which he is not shaken even by the heaviest of
sorrows;
(22)

That state, called Yoga, which is free from the
contact of sorrow (in the form of transmigration),
should be known. Nay, this Yoga should be resolutely
practised with an unwearied mind.
(23)

Completely renouncing all desires arising from
Sankalpas (thoughts of the world), and fully restraining
all the senses from all sides by the mind;
(24)

84

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 6

He should through gradual practice, attain
tranquillity; and fixing the mind on God through
reason controlled by steadfastness, he should not
think of anything else.
(25)

Drawing back the restless and fidgety mind
from all those objects after which it runs, he should
repeatedly fix it on God.
(26)

For, to the Yogd whose mind is perfectly serene,
who is sinless, whose passion is subdued, and who
is identified with Brahma, the embodiment of
Truth, Knowledge and Bliss, supreme happiness
comes as a matter of course.
(27)

The sinless Yogd, thus uniting his Self constantly
with God, easily enjoys the eternal Bliss of oneness
with Brahma.
(28)

The Yogd who is united in identity with the allpervading, infinite consciousness, whose vision

Text 30o34]

Bhagavadgdta

85

everywhere is even, beholds the Self existing in
all beings and all beings as assumed in the Self. (29)

He who sees Me (the Universal Self) present in
all beings, and all beings existing within Me, he is
never lost to me, nor am I ever lost to him. (30)

The Yogd who is established in union with Me, and
worships Me as residing in all beings as their very Self,
though engaged in all forms of activities, dwells in Me. (31)

Arjuna, he, who looks on all as one, on the
analogy of his own self, and looks upon the joy
and sorrow of all equallynsuch a Yogd is deemed
to be the highest of all.
(32)

Arjuna said : Kaefia, owing to restlessness of mind
I do not perceive the stability of this Yoga in the form
of equanimity, which You have just spoken of. (33)

86

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 6

For, Kaefia, the mind is very unsteady, turbulent,
tenacious and powerful; therefore, I consider it as
difficult to control as the wind.
(34)

rd Bhagavan said : The mind is restless no
doubt, and difficult to curb, Arjuna; but it can be
brought under control by repeated practice (of
meditation) and by the exercise of dispassion, O
son of Kuntd.
(35)

Yoga is difficult of achievement by one whose
mind is not subdued by him; however, who has
the mind under control, and is ceaselessly striving,
it can be easily attained through practice. Such
is My conviction.
(36)

Arjuna said : Kaefia, what becomes of the aspirant
who, though endowed with faith, has not been
able to subdue his passions, and whose mind is,
therefore, diverted from Yoga at the time of
death, and who thus fails to reach perfection in
Yoga (God-realization)?
(37)

Text 38o41]

Bhagavadgdta

87

Kaefia, swerved from the path leading to
God-realization and without anything to stand
upon, is he not lost like the scattered cloud,
deprived of both God-realization and heavenly
enjoyment?
(38)

Kaefia, only You are capable to remove this
doubt of mine completely; for none other than
you can dispel this doubt.
(39)

rd Bhagavan said : Dear Arjuna, there is no
fall for him either here or hereafter. For O my
beloved, none who strives for self-redemption (i.e.,
God-realization) ever meets with evil destiny. (40)

Such a person who has strayed from Yoga,
obtains the higher worlds, (heaven etc.) to which
men of meritorious deeds alone are entitled, and
having resided there for innumerable years, takes
birth of pious and prosperous parents.
(41)

88

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 6

Or (if he is possessed of dispassion) then not
attaining to those regions he is born in the family
of enlightened Yogds; but such a birth in this world
is very difficult to obtain.
(42)

Arjuna, he automatically regains in that birth
the spiritual insight of his previous birth; and
through that he strives harder than ever for
perfection in the form of God-realization. (43)

The other one who takes birth in a rich family,
though under the sway of his senses, feels drawn
towards God by force of the habit acquired in his
previous birth; nay, even the seeker of enlightenment on Yoga (in the form of even-mindedness)
transcends the fruit of actions performed with some
interested motive as laid down in the Vedas. (44)

The Yogd, however, who diligently takes up
the practice attains perfection in this very life with
the help of latencies of many births, and being

Text 46-47]

Bhagavadgdta

89

thoroughly purged of sin, forthwith reaches the
supreme state.
(45)

The Yogd is superior to the ascetics; he is
regarded superior even to those versed in sacred
lore. The Yogd is also superior to those who perform
action with some interested motive. Therefore,
Arjuna, do become a Yogd.
(46)

Of all Yogds, again, he who devoutly worships
Me with his mind focussed on Me is considered
by Me to be the best Yogd.
(47)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue
between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the sixth chapter
entitled iThe Yoga of Self-Control.i

Z

Chapter VII

rd Bhagavan said : Arjuna, now listen how with
the mind attached to Me (through exclusive love)
and practising Yoga with absolute dependence
on Me, you will know Me, the repository of all
power, strength and glory and other attributes,
the Universal soul, in entirety and without any
shadow of doubt.
(1)

I shall unfold to you in its entirety this wisdom
(Knowledge of God in His absolute formless aspect)
along with the Knowledge of the qualified aspect
of God (both with form and without form), having
known which nothing else remains yet to be known
in this world.
(2)

Hardly one among thousands of men strives to
realize Me; of those striving Yogds, again, some
rare one, devoting himself exclusively to Me,
knows Me in reality.
(3)

Text 4o8]

Bhagavadgdta

91

Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, reason and
also ego; these constitute My nature divided into
eight parts. This indeed is My lower (material)
nature; the other than this, by which the whole
universe is sustained, know it to be My higher
(or spiritual) nature in the form of Jdva (the lifeprinciple), O Arjuna.
(4-5)

Arjuna, know that all beings have evolved
from this twofold Prakaeti, and that I am the
source of the entire creation, and into Me again
it dissolves.
(6)

There is nothing else besides Me, Arjuna. Like
clusters of yarn-beads formed by knots on a thread,
all this is threaded on Me.
(7)

Arjuna, I am the sap in water and the radiance
of the moon and the sun; I am the sacred syllable

92

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 7

OA in all the Vedas, the sound in ether, and virility
in men.
(8)

I am the pure odour (the subtle principle of
smell) in the earth and the brightness in fire; nay,
I am the life in all beings and austerity in the
ascetics.
(9)

Arjuna, know Me the eternal seed
of all beings. I am the intelligence of the intelligent;
the glory of the glorious am I.
(10)

Arjuna, of the mighty I am the might, free
from passion and desire; in beings I am the
sexual desire not conflicting with virtue or
scriptural injunctions.
(11)

Whatever other entities there are, born of Sattva
(the quality of goodness), and those that are born
of Rajas (the principle of activity) and Tamas (the
principle of inertia), know them all as evolved
from Me alone. In reality, however, neither do I
exist in them, nor do they in Me.
(12)

Text 13o16]

Bhagavadgdta

93

The whole of this creation is deluded by these
objects evolved from the three modes of Prakaetio
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas; that is why the world
fails to recognize Me, standing apart from these
the imperishable.
(13)

For, this most wonderful Maya (veil) of Mine,
consisting of the three Gufias (modes of Nature),
is extremely difficult to breakthrough; those,
however, who constantly adore Me alone, are
able to cross it.
(14)

Those whose wisdom has been carried away
by Maya, and are of demoniac nature, such
foolish and vile men of evil deeds do not
adore Me.
(15)

Four types of devotees of noble deeds worship
Me, Arjuna, the seeker after worldly possessions,
the afflicted, the seeker for knowledge, and the
man of wisdom, O best of Bharatas.
(16)

94

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 7

Of these, the best is the man of
wisdom, ever established in identity with Me and
possessed of exclusive devotion. For, I am extremely
dear to the wise man who knows Me in reality,
and he is extremely dear to Me.
(17)

Indeed, all these are noble, but the man of
wisdom is My very self; such is My view. For
such a devotee, who has his mind and intellect
merged in Me, is firmly established in Me alone
as the highest goal.
(18)

In the very last of all births the enlightened
person worships Me by realizing that all this is
God. Such a great soul is very rare indeed.(19)

Those whose wisdom has been carried away
by various desires, being prompted by their own
nature, worship other deities, adopting norms
relating to each.
(20)

Text 22o25]

Bhagavadgdta

95

Whatever celestial form a devotee (craving for
some worldly object) chooses to worship with
reverence, I stabilize the faith of that particular
devotee in that very form.
(21)

Endowed with such faith he worships that
particular deity and obtains through that deity
without doubt his desired enjoyments as ordained
by Me.
(22)

The fruit gained by these people of small
understanding, however, is perishable. The
worshippers of gods attain the gods; whereas My
devotees, howsoever they worship Me, eventually
come to Me and Me alone.
(23)

Not knowing My supreme nature, unsurpassable
and undecaying, the ignorant persons regard Me,
who am the Supreme Spirit, beyond the reach of
mind and senses, and the embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss, to have assumed a finite
form through birth as an ordinary human being.(24)

96

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 7

Veiled by My Yogamaya, divine potency, I
am not manifest to all. Hence these ignorant folk
fail to recognize Me, the birthless and imperishable
Supreme Deity i.e., consider Me as subject to
birth and death.
(25)

Arjuna, I know all beings, past as well as present,
nay, even those that are yet to come; but none,
devoid of faith and devotion, knows Me. (26)

O valiant Arjuna, through delusion in the
shape of pairs of opposites (such as pleasure and
pain etc.,) born of desire and aversion, all living
creatures in this world are falling a prey to
infatuation.
(27)

But those men of virtuous deeds, whose sins
have come to an end, being freed from delusion
in the shape of pairs of opposites born of attraction
and repulsion, worship Me with a firm resolve in
every way.
(28)

Text 29-30]

Bhagavadgdta

97

They who, having taken refuge in Me, strive
for deliverance from old age and death know
Brahma (the Absolute), the whole Adhyatma (the
totality of Jdvas or embodied souls), and the entire
field of Karma (action) as well as My integral
being, comprising Adhibhuuta (the field of Matter),
Adhidaiva (Brahma) and Adhiyaja (the unmanifest
Divinity dwelling in the heart of all beings as
their witness). And they who, possessed of a steadfast
mind, know thus even at the hour of death, they
too know Me alone.
(29-30)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
seventh chapter entitled iThe Yoga of Jana
(Knowledge of Nirgufia Brahma) and Vijana
(Knowledge of Manifest Divinity).i

Z

Chapter VIII

Arjuna said : Kaefia, what is that Brahma
(Absolute), what is Adhyatma (Spirit), and what
is Karma (Action)? What is called Adhibhuuta
(Matter) and what is termed as Adhidaiva (Divine
Intelligence)?
(1)

Kaefia, who is Adhiyaja here and how does
he dwell in the body? And how are You to be
realized at the time of death by those of steadfast
mind?
(2)

rd Bhagavan said:The supreme Indestructible
is Brahma, oneis own Self (the individual soul)
is called Adhyatma; and the discharge of spirits,
(Visarga), which brings forth the existence of beings,
is called Karma (Action).
(3)

Text 4o8]

Bhagavadgdta

99

fl/UH 4H

All perishable objects are Adhibhuuta; the
shining Purua (Brahma) is Adhidaiva; and in this
body I Myself, dwelling as the inner witness, am
Adhiyaja, O Arjuna!
(4)

He who departs from the body, thinking of Me
alone even at the time of death, attains My state;
there is no doubt about it.
(5)

Arjuna, thinking of whatever entity one leaves
the body at the time of death, that and that
alone one attains, being ever absorbed in its
thought.
(6)

H 7H

Therefore, Arjuna, think of Me at all times and
fight. With mind and reason thus set on Me, you
will doubtless come to Me.
(7)

Arjuna, he who with his mind disciplined
through Yoga in the form of practice of meditation

100

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 8

and thinking of nothing else, is constantly engaged
in contemplation of God attains the supremely
effulgent Divine Purua (God).
(8)

He who contemplates on the all-knowing, ageless
Being, the Ruler of all, subtler than the subtle,
the universal sustainer, possessing a form beyond
human conception, effulgent like the sun and far
beyond the darkness of ignorance.
(9)

Having by the power of Yoga firmly held the
life-breath in the space between the two eyebrows
even at the time of death, and then contemplating
on God with a steadfast mind, full of devotion, he
reaches verily that supreme divine Purua (God). (10)

I shall tell you briefly about that Supreme goal

Text 12o15]

Bhagavadgdta

101

(viz., God, who is an embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss), which the knowers of the
Veda term as the Indestructible, which striving
recluses, free from passion, merge into, and desiring
which the celibates practise Brahmacarya. (11)

Having controlled all the senses, and firmly
holding the mind in the heart, and then drawing
the life-breath to the head, and thus remaining
steadfast in Yogic concentration on God, he who
leaves the body and departs uttering the one
Indestructible Brahma, OA, and dwelling on Me
in My absolute aspect, reaches the supreme
goal.
(12-13)

Arjuna, whosoever always and constantly thinks
of Me with undivided mind, to that Yogd ever
absorbed in Me I am easily attainable.
(14)

Great souls, who have attained the highest
perfection, having come to Me, are no more subject
to rebirth, which is the abode of sorrow, and
transient by nature.
(15)

102

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 8

Arjuna, all the worlds from Brahmaloka (the
heavenly realm of the Creator, Brahma) downwards
are liable to birth and rebirth. But, O son of Kuntd,
on attaining Me there is no rebirth (For, while I
am beyond Time, regions like Brahmaloka, being
conditioned by time, are transitory).
(16)

Those Yogds who know from realization Brahmais
day as covering a thousand Mahayugas, and so his
night as extending to another thousand Mahayugas
know the reality about Time.
(17)

All embodied beings emanate from the
Unmanifest (i.e., Brahmais subtle body) at the
coming of the cosmic day; at the cosmic nightfall
they merge into the same subtle body of Brahma,
known as the Unmanifest.
(18)

Arjuna, this multitude of beings, being born
again and again, is dissolved under compulsion
of its nature at the coming of the cosmic night,
and rises again at the commencement of the
cosmic day.
(19)

Text 20o24]

Bhagavadgdta

103

Far beyond even this unmanifest, there is yet
another unmanifest Existence, that Supreme
Divine Person, who does not perish even though
all beings perish.
(20)

The same unmanifest which has been spoken
of as the Indestructible is also called the supreme
Goal; that again is My supreme Abode, attaining
which they return not to this mortal world.(21)

Arjuna, that eternal unmanifest supreme Purua
in whom all beings reside and by whom all this
is pervaded, is attainable only through exclusive
Devotion.
(22)

Arjuna, I shall now tell you the time (path)
departing when Yogds do not return, and also the
time (path) departing when they do return. (23)

104

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 8

(Of the two paths) the one is that in which are
stationed the all-effulgent fire-god and the deities
presiding over daylight, the bright fortnight, and
the six months of the northward course of the sun
respectively; proceeding along it after death Yogds,
who have known Brahma, being successively led
by the above gods, finally reach Brahma. (24)

The other path is that wherein are stationed
the gods presiding over smoke, night, the dark
fortnight, and the six months of the southward
course of the sun; the Yogd (devoted to action
with an interested motive) taking to this path after
death is led by the above gods, one after another,
and attaining the lustre of the moon (and enjoying
the fruit of his meritorious deeds in heaven) returns
to this mortal world.
(25)

For these two paths of the world, the bright
and the dark, are considered to be eternal.
Proceeding by one of them, one reaches the
supreme state from which there is no return; and
proceeding by the other, one returns to the mortal
world, i.e., becomes subject to birth and death
once more.
(26)

Text 27-28]

Bhagavadgdta

105

Knowing thus the secret of these two paths, O
son of Kuntd, no Yogd gets deluded. Therefore,
Arjuna, at all times be steadfast in Yoga in the
form of equanimity (i.e., strive constantly for My
realization).
(27)

The Yogd, realizing this profound truth,
doubtless transcends all the rewards enumerated
for the study of the Vedas as well as for the
performance of sacrifices, austerities and charities,
and attains the supreme and primal state. (28)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord,
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga,
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends
eighth chapter entitled iThe Yoga of
Indestructible Brahma.i

Z

the
the
the
the

Chapter IX

rd Bhagavan said : To you, who are devoid
of the carping spirit, I shall now unfold the most
secret knowledge of Nirgufia Brahma along
with the knowledge of manifest Divinity,
knowing which you shall be free from the evil
of worldly existence.
(1)

This knowledge (of both the Nirgufia and
Sagufia aspects of Divinity) is a sovereign science,
a sovereign secret, supremely holy, most excellent,
directly enjoyable, attended with virtue, very easy
to practise and imperishable.
(2)

Arjuna, people having no faith in this Dharma,
failing to reach Me, continue to revolve in the
path of the world of birth and death.
(3)

Text 5o8]

Bhagavadgdta

107

The whole of this universe is permeated by
Me as unmanifest Divinity, and all beings dwell
on the idea within Me. But really speaking, I am
not present in them.
(4)

Nay, all those beings abide not in Me; but
behold the wonderful power of My divine Yoga;
though the Sustainer and Creator of beings, Myself
in reality dwell not in those beings.
(5)

Just as the extensive air, which is moving
everywhere, (being born of ether) ever remains in
ether, likewise know that all beings, who have
originated from My Sankalpa, abide in Me. (6)

Arjuna, during the Final Dissolution all
beings enter My Prakaeti (the prime cause), and
at the beginning of creation, I send them forth
again.
(7)

Wielding My Nature I procreate, again and
again (according to their respective Karmas) all

108

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 9

this multitude of beings subject to the influence
of their own nature.
(8)

Arjuna, those actions, however, do not bind
Me, unattached as I am to such actions and standing
apart, as it were.
(9)

Arjuna, under My aegis, Nature brings forth
the whole creation, consisting of both sentient
and insentient beings; it is due to this cause that
the wheel of Sahsara is going round.
(10)

Not Knowing My supreme nature, fools deride
Me, the Overlord of the entire creation, who have
assumed the human form. That is to say, they take
Me, who have appeared in human form through
My eYogamayai for deliverance of the world, as
an ordinary mortal.
(11)

Those bewildered persons with vain hopes,
futile actions and fruitless knowledge have
embraced a fiendish, demoniacal and delusive
nature.
(12)

Text 13o16]

Bhagavadgdta

109

On the other hand, Arjuna, great souls who
have adopted the divine nature, knowing Me as
the prime source of all beings and the imperishable,
eternal, worship Me constantly with one
pointedness of mind.
(13)

Constantly chanting My names and glories and
striving for My realization, and bowing again and
again to Me, those devotees of firm resolve, ever
united with me through meditation, worship Me
with single-minded devotion.
(14)

Others, who follow the path of Knowledge,
betake themselves to Me through Yaja of
Knowledge, worshipping Me in My absolute,
formless aspect as one with themselves; while still
others worship Me in My Universal Form in many
ways, taking Me to be diverse in manifold
celestial forms.
(15)

I am the Vedic ritual, I am the sacrifice, I am
the offering to the departed; I am the herbage and
foodgrains; I am the sacred mantra, I am the clarified

110

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 9

butter, I am the sacred fire, and I am verily the act
of offering oblations into the fire.
(16)

I am the sustainer and ruler of this universe, its
father, mother and grandfather, the one worth
knowing, the purifier, the sacred syllable OA, and
the three VedasoRk, Yaju and Sama.
(17)

I am the supreme goal, sustainer, lord, witness,
abode, refuge, well-wisher seeking no return, origin
and end, resting-place, store-house to which all
beings return at the time of universal destruction,
and the imperishable seed.
(18)

I radiate heat as the sun, and hold
as well as send forth showers, Arjuna.
immortality as well as death; even so, I am
and also non-being.

back
I am
being
(19)

Those who perform action with some interested
motive as laid down in these three Vedas and

Text 21o23]

Bhagavadgdta

111

drink the sap of the Soma plant, and have thus been
purged of sin, worshipping Me through sacrifices,
seek access to heaven; attaining Indrais paradise
as the result of their virtuous deeds, they enjoy
the celestial pleasures of gods in heaven. (20)

Having enjoyed the extensive heaven-world,
they return to this world of mortals on the stock
of their merits being exhausted. Thus devoted to
the ritual with interested motive, recommended
by the three Vedas as the means of attaining
heavenly bliss, and seeking worldly enjoyments,
they repeatedly come and go (i.e., ascend to heaven
by virtue of their merits and return to earth when
their fruit has been enjoyed).
(21)

The devotees, however, who loving no one else
constantly think of Me, and worship Me in a
disinterested spirit, to those ever united in thought
with Me, I bring full security and personally attend
to their needs.
(22)

Arjuna, even those devotees who, endowed with

112

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 9

faith, worship other gods (with some interested
motive) worship Me alone, though with a mistaken
approach.
(23)

For, I am the enjoyer and also the lord of all
sacrifices; but they who do not know Me in reality
as the Supreme Deity, they fall i.e., return to life
on earth.
(24)

Those who are votaries of gods, go to gods,
those who are votaries of manes, reach the manes;
those who adore the spirits, reach the spirits and
those who worship Me, come to Me alone. That
is why My devotees are no longer subject to birth
and death.
(25)

Whosoever offers Me with love a leaf, a flower,
a fruit or even water, I appear in person before
that selfless devotee of sinless mind, and
delightfully partake of that article offered by him
with love.
(26)

Arjuna, whatever you do, whatever you eat,
whatever you offer as oblation to the sacred fire,

Text 28o31]

Bhagavadgdta

113

whatever you bestow as a gift, whatever you do
by way of penance, do that as an offering to Me.(27)

With your mind thus established in the Yoga
of renunciation (offering of all actions to Me),
you will be freed from the bondage of action in
the shape of good and evil results; thus freed from
them, you will attain Me.
(28)

I am equally present in all beings; there is none
hateful or dear to Me. They, however, who devoutly
worship Me abide in Me; and I too stand revealed
to them.
(29)

Even if the vilest sinner worships Me with
exclusive devotion, he should be regarded a saint;
for, he has rightly resolved. (He is positive in his
belief that there is nothing like devoted worship
of God).
(30)

Speedily he becomes virtuous and attains
abiding peace. Know it for certain, Arjuna, that
My devotee never suffers degradation.
(31)

114

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 9

Arjuna, women, Vaiyas (members of the trading
and agriculturist classes), uudras (those belonging to
the labour and artisan classes), as well as those of
impious birth (such as the pariah), whoever they may be,
taking refuge in Me, they too attain the supreme goal. (32)

How much more, then, if they be
Brahmafias and royal sages devoted to
Therefore, having obtained this joyless
transient human life, constantly worship Me.

holy
Me!
and
(33)

Fix your mind on Me, be devoted to Me,
worship Me and make obeisance to Me; thus
linking yourself with Me and entirely depending
on Me, you shall come to Me.
(34)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
ninth chapter entitled iThe Yoga of Sovereign
Science and the Sovereign Secret.i

Z

Chapter X

rd Bhagavan said : Arjuna, hear once again
My supreme word, which I shall speak to you,
who are so loving, out of solicitude for your
welfare.
(1)

Neither gods nor the great sages know the
secret of My birth (i.e., My appearance in human
or other garb out of mere sport); for I am the prime
cause in all respects of gods as well as of the
great seers.
(2)

He who knows Me in reality as unborn and
without beginning, and as the supreme Lord of
the Universe, he, undeluded among men, is purged
of all sins.
(3)

116

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 10

Reason, right knowledge, unclouded understanding, forbearance, veracity, control over the
senses and mind, joy and sorrow, evolution and
dissolution, fear and fearlessness, non-violence,
equanimity, contentment, austerity, charity, fame
and obloquyothese diverse traits of creatures
emanate from Me alone.
(4-5)

The seven great seers, their four elders (Sanaka
and others), and the fourteen Manus or progenitors
of mankind (such as Svayambhuva and his
successors), who are all devoted to Me, were
born of My will; to whom all these creatures
belong.
(6)

He who knows in reality this supreme divine
glory and supernatural power of Mine gets
established in Me through unfaltering devotion;
of this there is no doubt.
(7)

I am the source of all creation and everything in
the world moves because of Me; knowing thus, the
wise, full of devotion, constantly worship Me. (8)

Text 9o13]

Bhagavadgdta

117

With their minds fixed on Me, and their lives
surrendered to Me, conversing and enlightening
one another about My glories, My devotees ever
remain contented and take delight in Me.
(9)

On those ever united through meditation with Me
and worshipping Me with love, I confer that Yoga
of wisdom through which they come to Me. (10)

In order to bestow My compassion on them,
I, dwelling in their hearts, dispel their darkness
born of ignorance by the illuminating lamp of
knowledge.
(11)

Arjuna said : You are the transcendent Eternal,
the supreme Abode and the greatest purifier; all
the seers speak of You as the eternal divine Purua,
the primal Deity, unborn and all-pervading.

118

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 10

Likewise speak the celestial sage Narada, the sages
Asita and Devala and the great sage Vyasa; and
Yourself too proclaim this to me.
(12-13)

Kaefia, I believe as true all that You tell me.
Lord, neither demons nor gods are aware of Your
manifestations.
(14)

O Creator of beings, O Ruler of creatures, god
of gods, the Lord of the universe, O supreme Purua,
You alone know what You are by Yourself. (15)

Therefore, You alone can describe in full Your
divine glories, whereby You pervade all these
worlds.
(16)

O Master of Yoga, through what process of
continuous meditation shall I know You? And in
what particular forms, O Lord, are You to be
meditated upon by me?
(17)

Text 19o22]

Bhagavadgdta

119

Kaefia, tell me once more in detail Your power
of Yoga and Your glory; for I know no satiety in
hearing Your nectar-like words.
(18)

rd Bhagavan said : Arjuna, now I shall tell
you My prominent divine glories; for there is no
limit to My manifestations.
(19)

Arjuna, I am the universal Self seated in the
hearts of all beings; so, I alone am the beginning,
the middle and also the end of all beings. (20)

I am Vifiu among the twelve sons of Aditi,
and the radiant sun among the luminaries; I am
the glow of the Maruts (the forty-nine wind-gods),
and the moon the lord of the stars.
(21)

Among the Vedas, I am the Samaveda; among
the gods, I am Indra. Among the organs of
perception i.e., senses, I am the mind; and I am the
consciousness (life-energy) in living beings. (22)

120

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 10

Among the eleven Rudras (gods of destruction),
I am iva; and among the Yakas and Rakasas,
I am the lord of riches (Kubera). Among the eight
Vasus, I am the god of fire; and among the
mountains, I am the Meru.
(23)

Among the priests, Arjuna, know Me to be
their chief, Baehaspati. Among warrior-chiefs, I am
Skanda (the generalissimo of the gods); and among
the reservoirs of water, I am the ocean.
(24)

Among the great seers, I am Bhaegu; among
words, I am the sacred syllable OA, among
sacrifices, I am the sacrifice of Japa (muttering of
sacred formulas); and among the immovables, the
Himalayas.
(25)

Among all trees, I am the Avattha (the holy
fig tree); among the celestial sages, Narada; among
the Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Citraratha, and
among the Siddhas, I am the sage Kapila. (26)

Text 28o31]

Bhagavadgdta

121

Among horses, know me to be the celestial horse
Uccairava, begotten of the churning of the ocean
along with nectar; among mighty elephants, Airavata
(Indrais elephant); and among men, the king.(27)

Among weapons, I am the thunderbolt; among
cows, I am the celestial cow Kamadhenu (the cow
of plenty). I am the sexual desire which leads to
procreation (as enjoined by the scriptures); among
serpents I am Vasuki.
(28)

Among Nagas (a special class of serpents), I
am the serpent-god Ananta; and I am Varufia, the
lord of aquatic creatures. Among the manes, I am
Aryama (the head of the Pitaes); and among rulers,
I am Yama (the god of death).
(29)

Among the Daityas, I am the great devotee Prahlada;
and of calculators, I am Time; among quadrupeds, I
am the lion; and among birds, I am GaruOEa. (30)

Among purifiers, I am the wind; among warriors,
I am rd Rama. Among fishes, I am the shark; and
among streams, I am the Ganges.
(31)

122

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 10

Arjuna, I am the beginning, the middle and
the end of all creations. Of all knowledge, I am
the knowledge of the soul, (metaphysics); among
disputants, I am the right type of reasoning. (32)

Among the sounds represented by the various
letters, I am eAi (the sound represented by the
first letter of the alphabet); of the different kinds
of compounds in grammar, I am the copulative
compound. I am verily the endless Time (the
devourer of Time, God); I am the sustainer of all,
having My face on all sides.
(33)

I am the all-destroying Death that annihilates
all, and the origin of all that are to be born. Of
feminities, I am Kdrti, rd,Vak, Smaeti, Medha, Dhaeti
and Kama (the goddesses presiding over glory,
prosperity, speech, memory, intelligence, endurance
and forbearance, respectively).
(34)

Text 36o39]

Bhagavadgdta

123

Likewise, among the rutis that can be sung, I am
the variety known as Baehatsama; while among
the Vedic hymns, I am the hymn known as Gayatrd.
Again, among the twelve months of the Hindu
calendar, I am the month known as eMargadrai (corresponding approximately to November December);
and among the six seasons (successively appearing in
India in the course of a year) I am the spring season.(35)

I am gambling among deceitful practices, and
the glory of the glorious. I am the victory of the
victorious, the resolve of the resolute, the goodness
of the good.
(36)

I am Kaefia among the Vaefiis, Arjuna among
the sons of PafiOEu, Vyasa among the sages, and
the sage ukracarya among the wise.
(37)

I am the subduing power of rulers; I am
righteousness in those who seek to conquer. Of things
to be kept secret, I am the custodian in the shape of
reticence; and I am the wisdom of the wise. (38)

Bhagavadgdta

124

[Ch. 10

Arjuna, I am even that, which is the seed of all
life. For there is no creature, moving or unmoving,
which can exist without Me.
(39)

Arjuna, there is no limit to My divine
manifestations. This is only a brief description
by Me of the extent of My glory.
(40)

Every such being as is glorious, brilliant and
powerful, know that to be a part manifestation of
My glory.
(41)

Or, what will you gain by knowing all this
in detail, Arjuna? Suffice it to say that I hold
this entire universe by a fraction of My Yogic
Power.
(42)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
tenth chapter entitled iThe Yoga of Divine Glories.i

Z

Chapter XI

Arjuna said : Thanks to the most profound words
of spiritual wisdom that You have spoken out of
kindness to me, this delusion of mine has entirely
disappeared.
(1)

For, Kaefia, I have heard from You in detail an
account of the evolution and dissolution of beings,
and also Your immortal glory.
(2)

Lord, You are precisely what You declare Yourself
to be. But I long to see Your divine form possessed
of wisdom, glory, energy, strength, valour and
effulgence, O Puruottama, the Supreme Being! (3)

Kaefia, if You think that it can be seen by me,

126

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 11

then, O Lord of Yoga, reveal to me Your
imperishable form.
(4)

rd Bhagavan said: Arjuna, behold My manifold,
multifarious divine forms of various colours and
shapes, in their hundreds and thousands.
(5)

Behold in Me, Arjuna, the twelve sons of Aditi,
the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras (gods of
destruction), the two Avindkumaras (the twin-born
physicians of gods) and the forty-nine Maruts
(wind-gods), and witness many more wonderful
forms never seen before.
(6)

Arjuna, behold as concentrated within this body
of Mine the entire creation consisting of both
animate and inanimate beings, and whatever else
you desire to see.
(7)

But surely you cannot see Me with these human
eyes of yours; therefore, I vouchsafe to you the

Text 9o12]

Bhagavadgdta

127

divine eye. With this you behold My divine power
of Yoga.
(8)

Sajaya said : My lord! having spoken thus,
rd Kaefia, the supreme Master of Yoga, forthwith
revealed to Arjuna His supremely glorious divine
Form.
(9)

Arjuna saw the supreme Deity possessing many
mouths and eyes, presenting many a wonderful
sight, decked with many divine ornaments,
wielding many uplifted divine weapons, wearing
divine garlands and vestments, anointed all over
with divine sandal-pastes, full of all wonders,
infinite and having faces on all sides. (10-11)

If there be the effulgence of a thousand suns
bursting forth all at once in the heavens, even
that would hardly approach the splendour of the
mighty Lord.
(12)

128

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 11

Concentrated at one place in the person of that
supreme Deity, Arjuna then beheld the whole
universe with its manifold divisions.
(13)

Then Arjuna, full of wonder and with the hair
standing on end, reverentially bowed his head to
the divine Lord, and with joined palms addressed
Him thus.
(14)

Arjuna said : Lord, I behold within your body
all gods and hosts of different beings, Brahma
throned on his lotus-seat, iva and all Ris and
celestial serpents.
(15)

O Lord of the universe, I see you endowed
with numerous arms, bellies, mouths, and eyes

Text 17o19]

Bhagavadgdta

129

and having innumerable forms extended on all
sides. I see neither your beginning nor middle,
nor even your end, manifested as you are in the
form of the universe.
(16)

H 17H
I see you endowed with diadem, club and discus,
a mass of splendour glowing all round, having
the brilliance of a blazing fire and the sun, hard
to gaze at and immeasurable on all sides. (17)

H 18H

You are the supreme indestructible worthy of
being known; you are the ultimate refuge of this
universe. You are, again, the protector of the ageless
Dharma; I consider You to be the eternal
imperishable Being.
(18)

130

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 11

I see You without beginning, middle or end,
possessing unlimited prowess and endowed with
numberless arms, having the moon and the sun
for Your eyes, and blazing fire for Your mouth,
and scorching this universe by Your radiance. (19)

Yonder space between heaven and earth and
all the quarters are entirely filled by You alone.
Seeing this transcendent, dreadful Form of Yours,
O Soul of the universe, all the three worlds feel
greatly alarmed.
(20)

Yonder hosts of gods are entering You; some
with palms joined out of fear are recounting Your
names and glories. Multitudes of Maharis and
Siddhas, saying eLet there be peacei, are extolling
You by means of excellent hymns.
(21)

Text 22o24]

Bhagavadgdta

131

The eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas and eight
Vasus, the Sadhyas and Vivedevas, the two
Avindkumaras and forty-nine Maruts, as well as
the manes and multitudes of Gandharvas, Yakas,
Asuras and Siddhas, all these gaze upon You in
amazement.
(22)

Lord, seeing this stupendous and dreadful Form
of Yours, possessing numerous mouths and eyes,
many arms, thighs and feet, many bellies and many
teeth, the worlds are terror-struck; so am I. (23)

Lord, seeing Your Form reaching the heavens,
effulgent multi-coloured, having its mouth wide
open and possessing large flaming eyes, I, with
my inmost self frightened, have lost self-control
and find no peace.
(24)

132

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 11

Seeing Your faces frightful on account of their
teeth, and blazing like the fire at the time of
universal destruction, I am utterly bewildered and
find no happiness; therefore, have mercy on me, O
Lord of celestials! O Abode of the universe! (25)

All those sons of Dhaetarara with hosts of kings
are entering You. Bhdma, Drofia and yonder Karfia,
with the principal warriors on our side as well,
are rushing headlong into Your fearful mouths
looking all the more terrible on account of their
teeth; some are seen stuck up in the gaps between
Your teeth with their heads crushed.
(26-27)

Text 29o31]

Bhagavadgdta

133

As the myriad streams of rivers rush towards
the sea alone, so do those warriors of the mortal
world enter Your flaming mouths.
(28)

As moths rush with great speed into the blazing
fire for extinction out of eMohai, even so, all these
people are with great rapidity entering Your mouths
to meet their doom.
(29)

Devouring all the worlds through Your flaming
mouths and licking them on all sides, O Lord
Vifiu! Your fiery rays fill the whole universe with
their fierce radiance and are burning it.
(30)

Tell me who You are with a form so terrible?
My obeisance to You, O best of gods; be kind to
me. I wish to know You, the Primal Being, in
particular; for I know not Your purpose. (31)

134

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 11

rd Bhagavan said : I am mighty Kala (the
eternal Time-spirit), the destroyer of the worlds.
I am out to exterminate these people. Even without
you all those warriors, arrayed in the enemyis camp,
shall die.
(32)

Therefore, do you arise and win glory;
conquering foes, enjoy the affluent kingdom. These
warriors stand already slain by Me; be you only
an instrument, Arjuna.
(33)

Do kill Drofia and Bhdma and Jayadratha and
Karfia and other brave warriors, who already stand
killed by Me; fear not. Fight and you will surely
conquer the enemies in the war.
(34)

Text 35o37]

Bhagavadgdta

135

Sajaya said : Hearing these words of Bhagavan
Keava, Arjuna tremblingly bowed to Him with
joined palms, and bowing again in extreme terror
spoke to rd Kaefia in faltering accents.
(35)

Arjuna said : Lord, well it is, the universe exults
and is filled with love by chanting Your names,
virtues and glory; terrified Rakasas are fleeing
in all directions, and all the hosts of Siddhas are
bowing to You.
(36)

O Great soul, why should they not bow to you,
who are the progenitor of Brahma himself and
the greatest of the great? O infinite Lord of celestials,
Abode of the universe, You are that which is

136

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 11

existent (Sat), that which is non-existent (Asat)
and also that which is beyond both, viz., the
indestructible Brahma.
(37)

You are the primal Deity, the most ancient
Person; You are the ultimate resort of this universe.
You are both the knower and the knowable, and
the highest abode. It is You who pervade the
universe, O one assuming endless forms. (38)

You are Vayu (the wind-god), Yama (the god
of death), Agni (the god of fire), Varufia (the god
of water), the moon-god, Brahma (the Lord of
creation), nay, the father of Brahma himself. Hail,
hail to You a thousand times; salutations, repeated
salutations to You once again.
(39)

O Lord of infinite prowess, my salutations to

Text 41o43]

Bhagavadgdta

137

You from the front and from behind. O soul of
all, my obeisance to You from all sides indeed.
You, who possess infinite might, pervade all;
therefore, You are all.
(40)

The way in which I have importunately called
You, either through intimacy or thoughtlessly, iHo
Kaefia! Ho Yadava! Ho Comrade!i and so on,
unaware of the greatness of Yours, and thinking
You only to be a friend, and the way in which
You have been slighted by me in jest, O sinless
one, while at play, reposing, sitting or at meals,
either alone or even in the presence of otherso
for all that, O Immeasurable Lord, I crave
forgiveness from You.
(41-42)

H 43H

You are the father of this moving and unmoving
creation, nay, the greatest teacher worthy of

Bhagavadgdta

138

[Ch. 11

adoration. O Lord of incomparable might, in all the
three worlds there is none else even equal to You;
how, then, can anyone be greater than to You? (43)

Therefore, Lord, prostrating my body at Your
feet and bowing low I seek to propitiate You, the
ruler of all and worthy of all praise. It behoves
You to bear with me even as a father bears with
his son, a friend with his friend and a husband
with his beloved spouse.
(44)

Having seen Your wondrous form, which was
never seen before, I feel transported with joy; at
the same time my mind is tormented by fear. Pray
reveal to me that divine form; the form of Vifiu
with four-arms; O Lord of celestials, O Abode of
the universe, be gracious.
(45)

I wish to see You adorned in the same way

Text 47o49]

Bhagavadgdta

139

with a diadem on the head, and holding a mace
and a discus in two of Your hands. O Lord with
a thousand arms, O Universal Being, appear again
in the same four-armed Form.
(46)

rd Bhagavan said : Arjuna! pleased with you
I have shown you, through My power of Yoga,
this supreme, effulgent, primal and infinite Cosmic
Form, which has never been seen before by anyone
other than you.
(47)

Arjuna, in this mortal world I cannot be seen
in this Form by anyone other than you, either
through the study of the Vedas or by rituals, or
again through gifts, actions or austere penances.(48)

Seeing such a dreadful Form of Mine as this,

140

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 11

do not be perturbed or perplexed; with a fearless
and tranquil mind, behold once again the same
four-armed Form of Mine (bearing the conch,
discus, mace and lotus).
(49)

Sajaya said : Having spoken thus to Arjuna,
Bhagavan Vasudeva again revealed to him His
own four-armed Form; and then, assuming a genial
form, the high-souled rd Kaefia consoled the
frightened Arjuna.
(50)

Arjuna said : Kaefia, seeing this gentle human
form of Yours I have regained my composure and
am my ownself again.
(51)

rd Bhagavan said : This form of Mine (with
four-arms) which you have just seen, is exceedingly
difficult to behold. Even the gods are always eager
to see this form.
(52)

Text 53o55]

Bhagavadgdta

141

Neither by study of the Vedas nor by penance,
nor again by charity, nor even by rituals can I be
seen in this form (with four-arms) as you have
seen Me.
(53)

Through single-minded devotion, however, I
can be seen in this form (with four-arms), nay,
known in essence and even entered into, O valiant
Arjuna.
(54)

Arjuna, he who performs all his duties for My
sake, depends on Me, is devoted to Me, has no
attachment, and is free from malice towards all
beings, reaches Me.
(55)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
eleventh chapter entitled iThe Yoga of the Vision
of the Universal Form.i

Z

Chapter XII

Arjuna said : The devotees exclusively and
constantly devoted to You in the manner stated
just earlier, adore You as possessed of form and
attributes, and those who adore as the supreme
Reality only the indestructible unmanifest Brahma
(who is Truth, Knowledge and Bliss solidified)o
of these two types of worshippers who are the
best knowers of Yoga?
(1)

rd Bhagavan said : I consider them to be the
best Yogds, who endowed with supreme faith, and
ever united through meditation with Me, worship
Me with their mind centred on Me.
(2)

Text 5o8]

Bhagavadgdta

143

Those, however, who fully controlling all
their senses and even-minded towards all, and
devoted to the welfare of all beings, constantly
adore as their very self the unthinkable,
omnipresent, indestructible, indefinable, eternal,
immovable, unmanifest and changeless Brahma,
they too come to Me.
(3-4)

Of course, the strain is greater for those who
have their mind attached to the Unmanifest, as
attunement with the Unmanifest is attained with
difficulty by the body-conscious people.
(5)

On the other hand, those depending exclusively
on Me, and surrendering all actions to Me,
worship Me (God with attributes), constantly
meditating on Me with single-minded devotion,
them, Arjuna, I speedily deliver from the ocean
of birth and death, their mind being fixed
on Me.
(6-7)

Therefore, fix your mind on Me, and establish

144

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 12

your intellect in Me alone; thereafter you will abide
solely in Me. There is no doubt about it. (8)

If you cannot steadily fix the mind on Me,
Arjuna, then seek to attain Me through the Yoga
of practice.
(9)

If you are unequal even to the pursuit of
such practice, be intent to work for Me; you shall
attain perfection (in the shape of My realization)
even by performing actions for My sake. (10)

If, taking recourse to the Yoga of My realization,
you are unable even to do this, then, subduing
your mind and intellect etc., relinquish the fruit
of all actions.
(11)

H 12H
Knowledge is better than practice without
discernment, meditation on God is superior to
knowledge, and renunciation of the fruit of actions
is even superior to meditation; for, peace
immediately follows from renunciation.
(12)

Text 14o17]

Bhagavadgdta

145

He who is free from malice towards all beings,
friendly and compassionate, and free from the feelings
of eIi and eminei, balanced in joy and sorrow, forgiving
by nature, ever-contented and mentally united with
Me, nay, who has subdued his mind, senses and body,
has a firm resolve, and has surrendered his mind and
reason to Meothat devotee of Mine is dear to Me.(13-14)

He who is not a source of annoyance to his
fellow-creatures, and who in his turn does not feel
vexed with his fellow-creatures, and who is free
from delight and envy, perturbation and fear, is
dear to Me.
(15)

He who wants nothing, who is both internally
and externally pure, is wise and impartial and has
risen above all distractions, and who renounces
the sense of doership in all undertakingsosuch
a devotee of Mine is dear to Me.
(16)

He who neither rejoices nor hates, nor grieves,
nor desires, and who renounces both good and evil
actions and is full of devotion, is dear to Me.(17)

146

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 12

He who deals equally with friend and foe, and
is the same in honour and ignominy, who is alike
in heat and cold, pleasure and pain and other
contrary experiences, and is free from attachment,
he who takes praise and reproach alike, and is
given to contemplation and is contented with any
means of subsistence available, entertaining no
sense of ownership and attachment in respect of
his dwelling-place and is full of devotion to Me,
that person is dear to Me.
(18-19)

Those devotees, however, who partake in a
disinterested way of this nectar of pious wisdom set
forth above, endowed with faith and solely devoted
to Me, they are extremely dear to Me.
(20)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
twelfth chapter entitled iThe Yoga of Devotioni

Z

Chapter XIII

rd Bhagavan said : This body, Arjuna is termed
as the Field (Ketra) and he who knows it, is called
the knower of the Field (Ketraja) by the sages
discerning the truth about both.
(1)

H 2H
Know Myself to be the Ketraja (individual
soul) in all the Ketras (fields), Arjuna. And
it is the knowledge of the field (Ketra) and
knower (Ketraja) (i.e., of Matter with its
evolutes and the Spirit) which I consider as
true knowledge.
(2)

What that Field (Ketra) is and what is its nature,
what are its modifications, and from what causes
what effects have arisen, and also who its knower
(Ketraja) is, and what is His gloryohear all this
from Me in brief.
(3)

148

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 13

The truth about the Ketra and the Ketraja
has been expounded by the seers in manifold ways;
again, it has been separately stated in different
Vedic chants and also in the conclusive and
reasoned texts of the Brahmasuutras.
(4)

The five elements, the ego, the intellect, the
Unmanifest (Primordial Matter), the ten organs
of perception and action, the mind, and the
five objects of sense (sound, touch, colour, taste
and smell).
(5)

Also desire, aversion, pleasure, pain, the physical
body, consciousness, firmness: thus is the Ketra,
with its evolutes, briefly stated.
(6)

Absence of pride, freedom from hypocrisy, nonviolence, forbearance, uprightness of speech and
mind etc., devout service of the preceptor, internal

Text 8o11]

Bhagavadgdta

149

and external purity, steadfastness of mind and
control of body, mind and the senses;
(7)

H 8H

Dispassion towards the objects of enjoyment of
this world and the next, and also absence of egotism,
pondering again and again on the pain and evils
inherent in birth, death, old age and disease; (8)

Absence of attachment and the sense of mineness
in respect of son, wife, home etc., and constant
equipoise of mind both in favourable and
unfavourable circumstances;
(9)

H 10H
Unflinching devotion to Me through exclusive
attachment, living in secluded and holy places, and
finding no delight in the company of worldly
people;
(10)

Constancy in self-knowledge and seeing God
as the object of true knowledgeoall this is declared

Bhagavadgdta

150

[Ch. 13

as knowledge, and what is contrary to this is called
ignorance.
(11)

I shall speak to you at length about that which
ought to be known, and knowing which one attains
supreme Bliss. That supreme Brahma, who is the
lord of beginningless entities, is said to be neither
Sat (being) nor Asat (non-being).
(12)

It has hands and feet on all sides, eyes, head
and mouth in all directions, and ears all-round;
for it stands pervading all in the universe. (13)

Though perceiving all sense-objects, it is really
speaking devoid of all senses. Nay, though
unattached, it is the sustainer of all nonetheless;
and though attributeless, it is the enjoyer of Gufias,
the three modes of Prakaeti.
(14)

It exists without and within all beings, and constitutes
the animate and inanimate creation as well. And by

Text 16o19]

Bhagavadgdta

151

reason of its subtlety, it is incomprehensible; it is
close at hand and stands afar too.
(15)

Though integral like space in its undivided
aspect, it appears divided as it were, in all animate
and inanimate beings. And that Godhead, which
is the only object worth knowing, is the sustainer
of beings (as Vifiu), the destroyer (as Rudra) and
the creator of all (as Brahma).
(16)

That supreme Brahma is said to be the light of
all lights and entirely beyond Maya. That godhead
is knowledge itself, worth knowing, and worth
attaining through real wisdom, and is particularly
abiding in the hearts of all.
(17)

Thus the truth of the Ketra and knowledge, as
well as of the object worth knowing, i.e., God has
been briefly discussed; knowing this in reality,
My devotee enters into My being.
(18)

152

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 13

Prakaeti and Purua, know both these as
beginningless. And know all modifications such
as likes and dislikes etc., and all objects constituted
of the three Gufias as born of Prakaeti.
(19)

Prakaeti is said
forth the evolutes
individual soul is
the experience of

to be responsible for bringing
and the instruments; while the
declared to be responsible for
joys and sorrows.
(20)

Only the Purua in association with Prakaeti
experiences objects of the nature of the three Gufias
evolved from Prakaeti and it is attachment with
these Gufias that is responsible for the birth of
this soul in good and evil wombs.
(21)

The Spirit dwelling in this body, is really the
same as the Supreme. He has been spoken of as
the Witness, the true Guide, the Sustainer of all,
the Experiencer (as the embodied soul), the Overlord
and the Absolute as well. (22)

Text 24o27]

Bhagavadgdta

153

He who thus knows the Purua (Spirit) and
Prakaeti (Nature) together with the Gufiaso even
though performing his duties in everyway, is not
born again.
(23)

Some by meditation behold the supreme Spirit
in the heart with the help of their refined and
sharp intellect; others realize it through the
discipline of Knowledge, and still others, through
the discipline of Action, i.e., Karmayoga. (24)

Other dull-witted persons, however, not knowing
thus, worship even as they have heard from others;
and even those who are thus devoted to what they
have heard, are able to cross the ocean of mundane
existence in the shape of death.
(25)

Arjuna, whatsoever being, the moving or unmoving,
is born, know it as emanated through the union
of Ketra (Matter) and the Ketraja (Spirit). (26)

He alone truly sees, who sees the supreme Lord

154

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 13

as imperishable and abiding equally in all perishable
beings, both animate and inanimate.
(27)

For, by seeing the Supreme Lord equally present
in all, he does not kill the Self by himself, and
thereby attains the supreme state.
(28)

He who sees that all actions are performed in
everyway by nature (Prakaeti) and the Self as the
non-doer, he alone verily sees.
(29)

The moment man perceives the diversified
existence of beings as rooted in the one supreme
Spirit, and the spreading forth of all beings from the
same, that very moment he attains Brahma (who is
Truth, Consciousness and Bliss solidified). (30)

Arjuna, being without beginning and without
attributes, this indestructible supreme Spirit, though
dwelling in the body, in fact does nothing, nor
gets tainted.
(31)

Text 33-34]

Bhagavadgdta

155

As the all-pervading ether is not contaminated
by reason of its subtlety, though permeating the
body, the Self is not affected by the attributes of
the body due to Its attributeless character. (32)

Arjuna, as the one sun illumines this entire
universe, so the one Atma (Spirit) illumines the
whole Ketra (Field).
(33)

Those who thus perceive with the eye of
wisdom the difference between the Ketra and
Ketraja, and the phenomenon of liberation
from Prakaeti with her evolutes, reach the supreme
eternal Spirit.
(34)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
thirteenth chapter entitled iThe Yoga of
discrimination between the Field and the Knower
of the Field.i

Z

Chapter XIV

rd Bhagavan said : I shall expound once more
the supreme knowledge, the best of all knowledge,
acquiring which all sages have attained highest
perfection, being liberated from this mundane
existence.
(1)

Those who, by practising this knowledge, have
entered into My being, are not born again at the
cosmic dawn, nor feel disturbed even during the
cosmic dissolution (Pralaya).
(2)

My primordial Nature, known as the great
Brahma, is the womb of all creatures; in that womb
I place the seed of all life. The creation of all
beings follows from that union of Matter and Spirit,
O Arjuna.
(3)

Text 4o8]

Bhagavadgdta

157

Of all embodied beings that appear in all the
species of various kinds, Arjuna, Prakaeti or Nature
is the conceiving Mother, while I am the seedgiving Father.
(4)

Sattva, Rajas and Tamasothese three Gufias
born of Nature tie down the imperishable soul to
the body, Arjuna.
(5)

Of these Sattva, being immaculate, is illuminating
and flawless, Arjuna; it binds through attachment
to happiness and knowledge.
(6)

Arjuna, know the quality of Rajas, which is of
the nature of passion, as born of desire and
attachment. It binds the soul through attachment
to actions and their fruit.
(7)

And know Tamas, the deluder of all those who

158

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 14

look upon the body as their own self, as born of
ignorance. It binds the soul through error, sloth
and sleep, Arjuna.
(8)

Sattva draws one to joy and Rajas to action;
while Tamas, clouding wisdom, impels one to error,
sleep and sloth Arjuna.
(9)

Overpowering Rajas and Tamas, Arjuna,
prevails; overpowering Sattva and Tamas,
prevails; even so, overpowering Sattva and
Tamas prevails.

Sattva
Rajas
Rajas,
(10)

When light and discernment dawn in this body,
as well as in the mind and senses, then one should
know that Sattva is predominant.
(11)

With the preponderance of Rajas, Arjuna, greed,
activity, undertaking of action with an interested
motive, restlessness and a thirst for enjoyment make
their appearance.
(12)

Text 13o17]

Bhagavadgdta

159

With the growth of Tamas, Arjuna, obtuseness
of the mind and senses, disinclination to perform
oneis obligatory duties, frivolity and stuporoall
these appear.
(13)

When a man dies during the preponderance of
Sattva, he obtains the stainless ethereal worlds
(heaven etc.,) attained by men of noble deeds.(14)

Dying when Rajas predominates, he is born
among those attached to action; even so, the man
who has expired during the preponderance of Tamas
is reborn in the species of the deluded creatures
such as insects and beasts etc.
(15)

The reward of a righteous act, they say, is
Sattvika i.e., faultless in the shape of joy, wisdom
and dispassion etc., sorrow is declared to be the
fruit of a Rajasika act and ignorance, the fruit of
a Tamasika act.
(16)

160

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 14

Wisdom follows from Sattva, and greed,
undoubtedly, from Rajas; likewise obstinate error,
stupor and also ignorance follow from Tamas. (17)

Those who abide in the quality of Sattva wend
their way upwards; while those of a Rajasika
disposition stay in the middle. And those of a
Tamasika temperament, enveloped as they are in
the effects of Tamogufia, sink down.
(18)

When the discerning person sees no one as
doer other than the three Gufias, and realizes Me,
the supreme Spirit standing entirely beyond these
Gufias, he enters into My being.
(19)

H 20H
Having transcended the aforesaid three Gufias,
which have caused the body, and freed from birth,
death, old age and all kinds of sorrow, the
embodied soul attains supreme bliss.
(20)

Arjuna said : What are the marks of him who

Text 22o24]

Bhagavadgdta

161

has risen above the three Gufias, and what is his
conduct ? And how, Lord, does he rise above the
three Gufias?
(21)

rd Bhagavan said : Arjuna, he who hates not
light (which is born of Sattva) and activity (which
is born of Rajas) and even stupor (which is born
of Tamas), when prevalent, nor longs for them
when they have ceased.
(22)

He who, sitting like a witness, is not disturbed
by the Gufias, and who, knowing that the Gufias
alone move among the Gufias, remains established
in identity with God, and never falls off from
that state.
(23)

He who is ever established in the Self, takes
pain and pleasure alike, regards a clod of earth,
a stone and a piece of gold as equal in value, is
possessed of wisdom, accepts the pleasant as well
as the unpleasant in the same spirit, and views
censure and praise alike.
(24)

162

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 14

He who is equipoised in honour or ignominy,
is alike towards a friend or an enemy, and has
renounced the sense of doership in all undertakings,
is said to have risen above the three Gufias.(25)

He too who, constantly worships Me through
the Yoga of exclusive devotionotranscending
these three Gufias, he becomes eligible for attaining
Brahma.
(26)

For, I am the substratum of the imperishable
Brahma, of immortality, of the eternal Dharma and
of unending immutable bliss.
(27)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
fourteenth chapter entitled iThe Yoga of Division
of three Gufias.i

Z

Chapter XV

rd Bhagavan said : He who knows the Pdpala
tree (in the form of creation); which is said to be
imperishable with its roots in the Primeval Being
(God), whose stem is represented by Brahma (the
Creator), and whose leaves are the Vedas, is a
knower of the purport of the Vedas.
(1)

Fed by the three Gufias and having sense-objects
for their tender leaves, the branches of the aforesaid
tree (in the shape of the different orders of creation)
extend both downwards and upwards; and its roots,
which bind the soul according to its actions in
the human body, are spread in all regions, higher
as well as lower.
(2)

164

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 15

The nature of this tree of creation does not on
mature thought turn out what it is represented to
be; for it has neither beginning nor end, nor even
stability. Therefore, cutting down this Pdpala tree,
which is most firmly rooted, with the formidable
axe of dispassion.
(3)

Thereafter a man should diligently seek for that
supreme state, viz., God, having attained which
they return no more to this world; and having
fully resolved that he stands dedicated to
that Primeval Being (God Narayafia) Himself,
from whom the flow of this beginningless creation
has progressed, he should dwell and meditate
on Him.
(4)

Text 5o8]

Bhagavadgdta

165

They who are free from pride and delusion,
who have conquered the evil of attachment, and
are constantly abiding in God, whose cravings
have altogether ceased and who are completely
immune to all pairs of opposites going by the
names of pleasure and pain, and are undeluded,
attain that supreme immortal state.
(5)

Neither the sun nor the moon nor fire can
illumine that supreme self-effulgent state, attaining
which they never return to this world; that is My
supreme abode.
(6)

The eternal Jdvatma in this body is a fragment
of My own Self; and it is that alone which draws
around itself the mind and the five senses, which
abide in Prakaeti.
(7)

166

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 15

Even as the wind wafts scents from their seat,
so, too, the Jdvatma, which is the controller of the
body etc., taking the mind and the senses from
the body, which it leaves behind, forthwith migrates
to the body which it acquires.
(8)

It is while dwelling in the senses of hearing, sight,
touch, taste and smell, as well as in the mind, that
this Jdvatma enjoys the objects of senses. (9)

The ignorant know not the soul departing from,
or dwelling in the body, or enjoying the objects
of senses, i.e., even when it is connected with the
three Gufias; only those endowed with the eyes
of wisdom are able to realize it.
(10)

Striving Yogds too are able to realise this Self
enshrined in their heart. The ignorant, however,
whose heart has not been purified, know not this
Self in spite of their best endeavours.
(11)

Text 12o15]

Bhagavadgdta

167

The radiance in the sun that illumines the entire
world, and that which shines in the moon and
that which shines in the fire too, know that radiance
to be Mine.
(12)

And permeating the soil, it is I who support all
creatures by My vital energy, and becoming the
sapful moon, I nourish all plants.
(13)

Taking the form of fire, as Vaivanara, lodged
in the body of all creatures and united with the
Prafia (exhalation) and Apana (inhalation) breaths,
it is I who digest and assimilate the four kinds of
food.
(14)

It is I who remain seated in the heart of all

168

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 15

creatures as the inner controller of all; and it is
I who am the source of memory, knowledge and
the ratiocinative faculty. Again, I am the only
object worth knowing through the Vedas; I alone
am the origin of Vedanta and the knower of the
Vedas too.
(15)

The perishable and the imperishable tooothese
are the two kinds of Puruas in this world. Of
these, the bodies of all beings are spoken of as
the perishable; while the Jdvatma or the embodied
soul is called imperishable.
(16)

Yet, the Supreme Person is other than these,
who, having encompassed all the three worlds,
upholds and maintains all, and has been
spoken of as the imperishable Lord and the Supreme
Spirit.
(17)

Since I am wholly beyond the perishable world
of matter or Ketra, and am superior even to the

Text 19-20]

Bhagavadgdta

169

imperishable soul, Jdvatma, hence I am known as
the Puruottama, the Supreme Self, in the world
as well as in the Vedas.
(18)

Arjuna, the wise man who thus realizes Me as
the Supreme Personoknowing all, he constantly
worships Me (the all-pervading Lord) with his
whole being.
(19)

Arjuna, this most esoteric teaching has thus
been imparted by Me; grasping it in essence man
becomes wise and his mission in life is
accomplished.(20)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
fifteenth chapter entitled iThe Yoga of the Supreme
Person.i

Z

Chapter XVI

Absolute fearlessness, perfect purity of mind,
constant fixity in the Yoga of meditation for the
sake of Self-realization, and even so, charity in
its Sattvika form, control of the senses, worship
of God and other deities as well as of oneis elders
including the performance of Agnihotra (pouring
oblations into the sacred fire) and other sacred
duties, study and teaching of the Vedas and other
sacred books as well as the chanting of Godis
names and glories, suffering hardships for the
discharge of oneis sacred obligations and
uprightness of mind as well as of the body and
senses.
(1)

Non-violence in thought, word and deed,
truthfulness and geniality of speech, absence of
anger even on provocation, disclaiming doership
in respect of actions, quietude or composure of

Text 3o6]

Bhagavadgdta

171

mind, abstaining from slander, compassion towards
all creatures, absence of attachment to the objects
of senses even during their contact with the senses,
mildness, a sense of shame in transgressing the
scriptures or social conventions, and abstaining
from frivolous pursuits;
(2)

Sublimity, forbearance, fortitude, external
purity, bearing enmity to none and absence of
self-esteemothese are the marks of him, who is
born with the divine endowments, Arjuna. (3)

Hypocrisy, arrogance pride and anger, sternness
and ignorance too o these are the marks of him, who
is born with demoniac properties.
(4)

The divine endowment has been recognized
as conducive to liberation, and the demoniac one
as leading to bondage. Grieve not, Arjuna, for
you are born with the divine propensities. (5)

There are only two types of men in this world,

172

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 16

Arjuna, the one possessing a divine nature and
the other possessing a demoniac disposition. Of
these, the type possessing divine nature has
been dealt with at length; now hear in detail from
Me about the type possessing demoniac
disposition.
(6)

Men possessing a demoniac disposition know
not what is right activity and what is right
abstinence from activity. Hence they possess
neither purity (external or internal) nor good
conduct nor even truthfulness.
(7)

Men of demoniac disposition say this world is
without any foundation, absolutely unreal and
godless, brought forth by mutual union of the
male and female and hence conceived in lust;
what else than this?
(8)

Clinging to this false view these slow-witted
men of vile disposition and terrible deeds, are
wrong doers to mankind for the destruction of
the world.
(9)

Text 10o13]

Bhagavadgdta

173

H 10H
Cherishing insatiable desires and embracing
false doctrines through ignorance, these men of
impure conduct move in this world, full of
hypocrisy, pride and arrogance.
(10)

Giving themselves up to innumerable cares
ending only with death, they remain devoted to
the enjoyment of sensuous pleasures and are
firm in their belief that this is the highest limit
of joy.
(11)

Held in bondage by hundreds of ties of
expectation and wholly giving themselves up to
lust and anger, they strive to amass by unfair means
hoards of money and other objects for the
enjoyment of sensuous pleasures.
(12)

They say to themselves, iThis much has been
secured by me today and now I shall realize this
ambition. So much wealth is already with me and
yet again this shall be mine.
(13)

174

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 16

That enemy has been slain by me and I shall
kill those others too. I am the lord of all, the enjoyer
of all power, I am endowed with all occult powers,
and am mighty and happy.
(14)

iI am wealthy and own a large family; who
else is equal to me? I will sacrifice to gods, will
give alms, I will make merry,i Thus deluded by
ignorance, enveloped in the mesh of delusion and
addicted to the enjoyment of sensuous pleasures,
their minds bewildered by numerous thoughts,
these men of devilish disposition fall into the
foulest hell.
(15-16)

Intoxicated by wealth and honour, those selfconceited and haughty men perform sacrifices only
in name for ostentation, without following the
sacred rituals.
(17)

Text 18o22]

Bhagavadgdta

175

Given over to egotism, brute force, arrogance, lust
and anger etc., and calumniating others, they despise
Me (the in-dweller), dwelling in their own bodies
as well as in those of others.
(18)

Those haters, sinful, cruel and vilest among
men, I cast again and again into demoniacal wombs
in this world.
(19)

Failing to reach Me, Arjuna, those stupid souls
are born life after life in demoniac wombs and
then verily sink down to a still lower plane.(20)

Desire, anger and greedothese triple gates of
hell, bring about the downfall of the soul.
Therefore, one should shun all these three. (21)

Freed from these three gates of hell, man works

176

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 16

for his own salvation and thereby attains the
supreme goal, i.e., God.
(22)

Discarding the injunctions of the scriptures,
he who acts in an arbitrary way according to his
own sweet will, such a person neither attains
perfection, nor the supreme goal, nor even
happiness.
(23)

Therefore, the scripture alone is your guide
in determining what should be done and what
should not be done. Knowing this, you ought
to perform only such action as is ordained by
the scriptures.
(24)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
sixteenth chapter entitled iThe Yoga of Division
between the Divine and the Demoniacal
Properties.i

Z

Chapter XVII

Arjuna said: Those, endowed with faith, who
worship gods and others, disregarding the
injunctions of the scriptures, where do they stand,
Kaefiaoin Sattva, Rajas or Tamas ?
(1)

rd Bhagavan said: That untutored innate faith
of men is of three kindsoSattvika, Rajasika and
Tamasika. Hear of it from Me.
(2)

The faith of all men conforms to their mental
disposition, Arjuna. Faith constitutes a man;
whatever the nature of his faith, verily he is
that.
(3)

178

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 17

Men of Sattvika disposition worship gods;
those of Rajasika temperament worship demigods,
the demons; while others, who are of Tamasika
disposition, worship the spirits of the dead and
ghosts.
(4)

Men who practise severe penance of an arbitrary
type, not sanctioned by the scriptures, and who
are full of hypocrisy and egotism and are obsessed
with desire, attachment and pride of power; (5)

And who emaciate the elements constituting
their body as well as Me, the Supreme Spirit,
dwelling in their heartoknow those senseless
people to have a demoniac disposition.
(6)

Food also, which is agreeable to different men
according to their innate disposition is of three
kinds. And likewise, sacrifice, penance and charity

Text 8o11]

Bhagavadgdta

179

too are of three kinds each; hear their distinction
as follows.
(7)

Foods which promote longevity, intelligence,
vigour, health, happiness and cheerfulness, and
which are juicy, succulent, substantial and naturally
agreeable, are liked by men of Sattvika
nature.
(8)

Foods which are bitter, sour, salty, overhot,
pungent, dry and burning, and which cause
suffering, grief and sickness, are dear to the
Rajasika.
(9)

Food which is ill-cooked or not fully
ripe, insipid, putrid, stale and polluted, and which
is impure too, is dear to men of Tamasika
disposition.
(10)

The sacrifice which is offered, as ordained by

180

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 17

scriptural injunctions, by men who expect no return
and who believe that such sacrifices must be
performed, is Sattvika in character.
(11)

That sacrifice, however, which is offered for
the sake of mere show or even with an eye to its
fruit, know it to be Rajasika, Arjuna.
(12)

A sacrifice, which is not in conformity with
scriptural injunctions, in which no food is offered,
and no sacrificial fees are paid, which is without
sacred chant of hymns and devoid of faith, is said
to be Tamasika.
(13)

Worship of gods, the Brahmafias, oneis guru,
elders and wise-men, purity, straightforwardness,
continence and non-violenceothese are called
penance of the body.
(14)

Words which cause no annoyance to others

Text 16o19]

Bhagavadgdta

181

and are truthful, agreeable and beneficial, as well
as the study of the Vedas and other astras and
the practice of the chanting of Divine Nameo
this is known as penance of speech.
(15)

Cheerfulness of mind, placidity, habit of
contemplation on God, control of the mind and
perfect purity of inner feelingsoall this is called
austerity of the mind.
(16)

This threefold penance performed with supreme
faith by Yogds expecting no return is called
Sattvika.
(17)

The austerity which is performed for the sake
of renown, honour or adoration, as well as for any
other selfish gain, either in all sincerity or by way
of ostentation, and yields an uncertain and
momentary fruit, has been spoken of here as
Rajasika.
(18)

182

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 17

Penance which is resorted to out of foolish
notion and is accompanied by self-mortification,
or is intended to harm others, such penance has
been declared as Tamasika.
(19)

A gift which is bestowed with a sense of duty
on one from whom no return is expected,
at appropriate time and place, and to a
deserving person, that gift has been declared as
Sattvika.
(20)

A gift which is bestowed in a grudging spirit
and with the object of getting a service in return
or in the hope of obtaining a reward, is called
Rajasika.
(21)

A gift which is made without good grace and in
a disdainful spirit, out of time and place, and to
undeserving persons, is said to be Tamasika. (22)

Text 24o26]

Bhagavadgdta

183

OA, TAT and SATothis has been declared as
the triple appellation of Brahma, who is Truth,
Consciousness and Bliss. By that were the
Brahmafias and the Vedas as well as sacrifices
created at the cosmic dawn.
(23)

Therefore, acts of sacrifice, charity and austerity,
as enjoined by sacred precepts, are always
commenced by noble persons, used to the recitation
of Vedic chants, with the invocation of the divine
name eOAi.
(24)

With the idea that all this belongs to God, who
is denoted by the appellation TAT, acts of sacrifice
and austerity as well as acts of charity of various
kinds, are performed by the seekers of liberation,
expecting no return for them.
(25)

The name of God, eSATi, is used in the sense
of reality and goodness. And the word eSATi is
also used in the sense of a praiseworthy, auspicious
action, Arjuna.
(26)

184

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 17

And steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity and
charity is likewise spoken of as eSATi and action
for the sake of God is verily termed as eSATi. (27)

An oblation which is offered, a gift given, an
austerity practised, and whatever good deed is
performed, if it is without faith, it is termed as
naught i.e., easati; therefore, it is of no avail here
or hereafter.
(28)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord,
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga,
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends
seventeenth chapter entitled iThe Yoga of
Division of the Threefold Faith.i

Z

the
the
the
the

Chapter XVIII

Arjuna said: O mighty-armed rd Kaefia, O inner
controller of all, O Slayer of Kei, I wish to know
severally the truth of Sahnyasa as also of Tyaga.(1)

rd Bhagavan said : Some sages understand
Sahnyasa as the giving up of all actions motivated
by desire; and the wise declare that Tyaga consists
in relinquishing the fruit of all actions.
(2)

Some wise men declare that all actions contain
a measure of evil, and are therefore, worth giving
up; while others say that acts of sacrifice, charity
and penance are not to be shunned.
(3)

186

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 18

Of Sahnyasa and Tyaga, first hear My
conclusion on the subject of renunciation (Tyaga),
Arjuna; for renunciation, O tiger among men, has
been declared to be of three kindsoSattvika,
Rajasika and Tamasika.
(4)

Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are
worth giving up; they must be performed.
sacrifice, charity and penanceoall these
purifiers to the wise men.

not
For
are
(5)

Hence these acts of sacrifice, charity and
penance, and all other acts of duty too, must be
performed without attachment and expectation of
reward : this is My well-considered and supreme
verdict, Arjuna.
(6)

(Prohibited acts and those that are motivated
by desire should no doubt, be given up). But it
is not advisable to abandon a prescribed duty.
Such abandonment through ignorance has been
declared as Tamasika.
(7)

Text 8o11]

Bhagavadgdta

187

Should anyone give up his duties for fear of
physical strain, thinking that all actions are verily
painfulopractising such Rajasika form of
renunciation, he does not reap the fruit of
renunciation.
(8)

A prescribed duty which is performed simply
because it has to be performed, giving up
attachment and fruit, that alone has been
recognized as the Sattvika form of renunciation.(9)

He who has neither aversion for action which
is leading to bondage nor attachment to that which
is conducive to blessednessoimbued with the
quality of goodness, he has all his doubts resolved,
is intelligent and a man of true renunciation. (10)

Since all actions cannot be given up in their
entirety by anyone possessing a body, he alone
who renounces the fruit of actions is called a man
of renunciation.
(11)

188

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 18

Agreeable, disagreeable and mixedothreefold,
indeed, is the fruit that accrues after death from
the actions of the unrenouncing. But there is none
whatsoever for those who have renounced. (12)

In the branch of learning known as Sankhya,
which prescribes means for neutralizing all actions,
the five factors have been mentioned as
contributory to the accomplishment of all actions;
know them all from Me, Arjuna.
(13)

The following are the factors operating towards
the accomplishment of actions, viz., the body and
the doer, the organs of different kinds and the
different functions of manifold kinds; and the fifth
is Daiva or Prarabdha Karma (destiny).
(14)

These five are the contributory causes of
whatever actions, right or wrong, man performs
with the mind, speech and body.
(15)

Text 17o20]

Bhagavadgdta

Notwithstanding
an impure mind,
Self alone as the
understanding does

this, however, he who, having
regards the absolute, taintless
doer, that man of perverse
not view aright.
(16)

189

He whose mind is free from the sense of doership,
and whose reason is not affected by worldly objects
and activities, does not really kill, even having
killed all these people, nor does any sin accrue
to him.
(17)

The Knower, knowledge and the object of
knowledgeothese three motivate action. Even so,
the doer, the organs and activityothese are the
three constituents of action.
(18)

In the branch of knowledge dealing with the
Gufias or modes of Prakaeti, knowledge and action
as well as the doer have been declared to be of
three kinds according to the Gufia which predominates in each; hear them too duly from Me. (19)

That by which man perceives one imperishable

190

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 18

divine existence as undivided and equally present
in all individual beings, know that knowledge to
be Sattvika.
(20)

The knowledge by which man cognizes many
existences of various kinds, as apart from one
another, in all beings, know that knowledge to
be Rajasika.
(21)

Again, that knowledge which clings to one
body as if it were the whole, and which is irrational,
has no real grasp of truth and is trivial, has been
declared as Tamasika.
(22)

That action which is ordained by the scriptures
and is not accompanied by the sense of doership,
and has been done without any attachment or
aversion by one who seeks no return, is called
Sattvika.
(23)

That action however, which involves much
strain and is performed by one who seeks
enjoyments or by a man full of egotism, has been
spoken of as Rajasika.
(24)

Text 25o29]

Bhagavadgdta

191

That action which is undertaken through sheer
ignorance, without regard to consequences or loss
to oneself, injury to others and oneis own
resourcefulness, is declared as Tamasika. (25)

Free from attachment, unegoistic, endowed with
firmness and zeal and unswayed by success and
failureosuch a doer is said to be Sattvika.(26)

The doer who is full of attachment, seeks the
fruit of actions and is greedy, and who is oppressive
by nature and of impure conduct, and is affected
by joy and sorrow, has been called Rajasika.(27)

Lacking piety and self-control, uncultured,
arrogant, deceitful, inclined to rob others of their
livelihood, slothful, despondent and procrastinatingosuch a doer is called Tamasika. (28)

Now hear, Arjuna, the threefold divison,
based on the predominance of each Gufia, of

192

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 18

understanding (Buddhi) and firmness (Dhaeti), which
I shall explain in detail, one by one.
(29)

The intellect which correctly determines the paths
of activity and renunciation, what ought to be
done and what should not be done, what is fear
and what is fearlessness, and what is bondage and
what is liberation, that intellect is Sattvika.(30)

The intellect by which man does not truly
perceive what is Dharma and what is Adharma,
what ought to be done and what should not be
doneothat intellect is Rajasika.
(31)

The intellect which imagines even Adharma
to be Dharma, and sees all other things upsidedownowrapped in ignorance, that intellect is
Tamasika, Arjuna.
(32)

The unwavering firmness by which man controls
through the Yoga of meditation the functions of
the mind, the vital airs and the sensesothat
firmness, Arjuna, is Sattvika.
(33)

Text 34o38]

Bhagavadgdta

193

The firmness (Dhaeti), however, by which the
man seeking reward for his actions clutches with
extreme fondness virtues, earthly possessions and
worldly enjoymentsothat firmness (Dhaeti) is
said to be Rajasika, Arjuna.
(34)

The firmness (Dhaeti) by which an evil-minded
person does not give up sleep, fear, anxiety, sorrow
and vanity as well, that firmness is Tamasika.(35)

Now hear from Me the threefold joy too. That
in which the striver finds enjoyment through
practice of adoration, meditation and service to
God etc., and whereby he reaches the end of
sorrowosuch a joy, though appearing as poison
in the beginning, tastes like nectar in the end;
hence that joy, born as it is of the placidity of
mind brought about by meditation on God, has
been declared as Sattvika.
(36-37)

194

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 18

The delight which follows from the contact of
the senses with their objects is eventually poisonlike, though appearing at first as nectar; hence it
has been spoken of as Rajasika.
(38)

That which stupefies the self during its
enjoyment as well as in the endoderived from
sleep, indolence and obstinate error, such delight
has been called Tamasika.
(39)

There is no being on earth, or even among the
gods in heaven or anywhere else, who is free from
these three Gufias, born of Prakaeti.
(40)

The duties of the Brahmafias, the Katriyas
and the Vaiyas, as well as of the uudras have
been assigned according to their inborn qualities,
Arjuna.
(41)

Subjugation of the mind and senses, enduring
hardships for the discharge of oneis sacred
obligations, external and internal purity, forgiving
the faults of others, straightness of mind, senses

Text 43o46]

Bhagavadgdta

195

and behaviour, belief in the Vedas and other
scriptures, God and life after death etc., study and
teaching of the Vedas and other scriptures and
realization of the truth relating to Godoall these
constitute the natural duties of a Brahmafia.(42)

Heroism, majesty, firmness, diligence
dauntlessness in battle, bestowing gifts,
lordlinessoall these constitute the natural
of a Katriya.

and
and
duty
(43)

Agriculture, rearing of cows and honest
exchange of merchandiseothese constitute the
natural duty of a Vaiya (a member of the trading
class); and service of the other classes is the
natural duty even of a uudra (a member of the
labouring class).
(44)

Keenly devoted to his own natural duty, man
attains the highest perfection in the shape of Godrealization. Hear the mode of performance whereby
the man engaged in his inborn duty reaches that
highest consummation.
(45)

196

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 18

By worshipping Him from whom all beings
come into being and by whom the whole universe
is pervaded, through the performance of his
own natural duties, man attains the highest
perfection.
(46)

Better is oneis own duty, though devoid of
merit, than the duty of another well-performed;
for performing the duty ordained by his own nature,
man does not incur sin.
(47)

Therefore, Arjuna, one should not relinquish
oneis innate duty, even though it has a measure
of evil; for all undertakings are beset by some
evil, as is the fire covered by smoke.
(48)

He whose intellect is unattached everywhere,
whose thirst for enjoyment has altogether
disappeared and who has subdued his mind, reaches
through Sankhyayoga (the path of Knowledge)
the consummation of actionlessness.
(49)

Arjuna, know from Me only briefly the process

Text 51o54]

Bhagavadgdta

197

through which man having attained actionlessness,
which is the highest consummation of Janayoga
(the path of Knowledge), reaches Brahma. (50)

Endowed with a pure intellect and partaking
of a light, Sattvika and regulated diet, living
in a lonely and undefiled place having rejected
sound and other objects of sense, having controlled
the mind, speech and body by restraining the
mind and senses through firmness of a Sattvika
type,
taking a resolute stand on dispassion,
after having completely got rid of attraction
and aversion and remaining ever devoted to
the Yoga of meditation, having given up egotism,
violence, arrogance, lust, anger and luxuries,
devoid of the feeling of meum and tranquil
of heartosuch a man becomes qualified for
oneness with Brahma, who is Truth, Consciousness
and Bliss.
(51o53)

Established in identity with Brahma (who is
Truth, Consciousness and Bliss solidified), and

198

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 18

cheerful in mind, the Sankhyayogd no longer
grieves nor craves for anything. The same to all
beings, such a Yogd attains supreme devotion to
Me.
(54)

Through that supreme devotion he comes to
know Me in reality, what and who I am; and
thereby knowing Me truly, he forthwith merges
into My being.
(55)

The Karmayogd, however, who depends on Me,
attains by My grace the eternal, imperishable state,
even though performing all actions.
(56)

Mentally dedicating all your actions to Me,
and taking recourse to Yoga in the form of evenmindedness, be solely devoted to Me and
constantly fix your mind on Me.
(57)

With your mind thus devoted to Me, you shall,
by My grace overcome all difficulties. But, if from
self-conceit you do not care to listen to Me, you
will be lost.
(58)

Text 59o63]

Bhagavadgdta

199

If, taking your stand on egotism, you think, iI
will not fight,i vain is this resolve of yours; nature
will drive you to the act.
(59)

That action, too, which you are not willing to
undertake through ignorance you will perforce
perform, bound by your own duty born of your
nature.
(60)

Arjuna, God abides in the heart of all creatures,
causing them to revolve according to their Karma
by His illusive power (Maya) as though mounted
on a machine.
(61)

Take refuge in Him alone with all your being,
Arjuna. By His mere grace you will attain supreme
peace and the eternal abode.
(62)

SELH 63H

Thus, has this wisdom, more profound than all
profundities, been imparted to you by Me; deeply
pondering over it, now do as you like.
(63)

200

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 18

Hear, again, My supremely profound words,
the most esoteric of all truths; as you are extremely
dear to Me, therefore, I shall give you this salutary
advice for your own good.
(64)

Give your mind to Me, be devoted to Me,
worship Me and bow to Me. Doing so, you will
come to Me alone, I truly promise you; for, you
are exceptionally dear to Me.
(65)

Resigning all your duties to Me, the all-powerful
and all supporting Lord, take refuge in Me alone;
I shall absolve you of all sins, worry not. (66)

This secret gospel of the Gdta should never be
imparted to a man who lacks in austerity, nor to
him who is wanting in devotion, nor even to him
who is not willing to hear; and in no case to him
who finds fault with Me.
(67)

Text 69o72]

Bhagavadgdta

201

He who, offering the highest love to Me,
preaches the most profound gospel of the Gdta
among My devotees, shall come to Me alone;
there is no doubt about it.
(68)

Among men there is none who does Me a more
loving service than he; nor shall anyone be dearer
to Me on the entire globe than he.
(69)

Whosoever studies this sacred dialogue of ours
in the form of the Gdta, by him too shall I be
worshipped with Yaja of Knowledge; such is My
conviction.
(70)

The man who listens to the holy Gdta with
reverence, being free from malice, he too, liberated
from sin, shall reach the propitious worlds of pious
and the virtuous.
(71)

Have you, O Arjuna, heard this gospel of the

202

Bhagavadgdta

[Ch. 18

Gdta attentively? And has your delusion born of
ignorance been destroyed, O Dhanajaya, conqueror
of riches?
(72)

Arjuna said: Kaefia, by Your grace my delusion
has been destroyed and I have gained wisdom. I
am free of all doubt. I shall do your bidding.(73)

Sajaya said: Thus I heard the mysterious and
thrilling conversation between rd Kaefia and the
high-souled Arjuna, the son of Kuntd.
(74)

Having been blessed with the divine vision
by the grace of rd Vyasa, I heard in person this
supremely esoteric gospel from the Lord of Yoga,
rd Kaefia Himself, imparting it to Arjuna. (75)

Remembering, over and over, that sacred and

Text 77-78]

Bhagavadgdta

203

mystic conversation between Bhagavan rd Kaefia
and Arjuna, O King! I rejoice again and yet
again.
(76)

Remembering also, again and again, that most
wonderful form of rd Kaefia, great is my wonder
and I rejoice over and over again.
(77)

Wherever there is Bhagavan rd Kaefia, the Lord
of Yoga, and wherever there is Arjuna, the wielder
of the GafiOEdva bow, goodness, victory, glory and
unfailing righteousness will surely be there : such
is My conviction.
(78)

Thus, in the Upaniad sung by the Lord, the
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the
dialogue between rd Kaefia and Arjuna, ends the
eighteenth chapter entitled iThe Yoga of
Liberation through the Path of Knowledge and
Self-Surrender.i

Z
Oh Tat Sat

Z

God-realization through
Practice of Renunciation
Living even the life of a householder, man can
realize God through the practice of renunciation.
Indeed, erenunciationi is the principal means for
attaining God. Therefore, dividing them into seven
classes, the marks of renunciation are being shortly
written below.

(1) Total Renunciation of Prohibited Acts
This is non-performance, in anyway whatsoever,
through mind, speech and the body, low acts
prohibited by the scriptures, such as, theft, adultery,
falsehood, deception, fraud, oppression, violence,
taking of interdicted food and wrong-doing, etc.

(2) Renunciation of Acts performed
for the Satisfaction of Worldly Desires
This is non-performance of sacrifices, charities,
austerities, worship and other desire-born actions,

206

with a selfish motive,* for gaining objects of
enjoyment, e.g., wife, progeny, and wealth, etc.,
or with the object of curing diseases and
terminating other forms of suffering. This is the
second type of renunciation.

(3) Total Renunciation of Worldly Thirst
Honour, fame, social prestige, wife, progeny,
wealth and whatever other transient objects are
automatically gained by the force of Prarabdha
(Karma, which has begun to bear fruit), the desire
for their increase should be regarded as an obstacle
in God-realization, and renounced. This is the
third type of renunciation.

(4) Renunciation of the Habit of
Extracting Service from Others
with a Selfish Motive
Asking for money, or demanding service from
* If under the pressure of circumstance, one is
compelled to do an act sanctioned by tradition and the
scriptures, which is by nature rooted in desire, but nonperformance of which causes pain to anybody or adversely
affects the traditional ways of Action and worship,
performance of it disinterestedly, and only for general
good, is not an act of the satisfaction of desire.

207

another, for personal happiness; and acceptance
of things and service given without oneis asking
for the same; or entertaining any desire in the
mind for getting by any means oneis self-interest
served by another; all these and similar ideas of
getting service from another for the satisfaction
of self-interest should be renounced.* This is the
fourth type of renunciation.

(5) Total Renunciation of Indolence
and Desire for Fruit in the
Performance of all Duties
Whatever duties there are, e.g., cultivation of
devotion to God, worship of the celestials, service
of the parents and other elders, performance of
* If non-acceptance of physical service from another,
or offer of eatables by another, where one is entitled to
accept such service or offer, causes any pain to anyone,
or in anyway hinders the education of the people, in that
case, acceptance of service, abandoning selfishness, and
only for the pleasure of the offerer of service, is not
harmful. For non-acceptance of service done by the wife,
son or servant, or of eatables offered by friends and
relatives, is likely to cause them pain and may prove
harmful, so far as propriety of social conduct is concerned.

208

sacrifices, charities and austerities, maintenance
of the household through the earning of livelihood
by means of works assigned according to the
Varfiarama system, and taking of food and drink,
etc., for the bodyoin the performance of these,
indolence and every form of desire should be
renounced.

(A) Renunciation of Indolence in
the Practice of Devotion to God
Regarding it as the supreme duty of oneis life,
one should hear, reflect on, read and discourse on
the mysterious stories of the virtue, glory and
Love of God, who is extremely compassionate,
friend of all, the best of lovers, the knower of the
heart, and renouncing idleness practise constant
Japa, together with meditation, of His extremely
hallowed Name.

(B) Renunciation of Desire in the
Practice of Devotion to God
Regarding all enjoyments of this world and
the next as transient and perishable and hindrances
in the path of Devotion to God, no prayer should

209

be offered to God for obtaining any object
whatsoever, nor any desire should be entertained
in the mind for the same. Also, prayer should
not be offered to God for the removal of any
trouble even when one is overtaken by it; in
other words, the thought should be cultivated
in the mind that to sacrifice life is preferable
to bringing stain on the purity of Bhakti for
the sake of this false existence. For instance,
Prahlada, even though intensely persecuted by
his father, never offered any prayer to God for
the removal of his distress.
Curse with harsh expressions, such as, iLet the
chastizement of God be on Youi, etc., should not
be pronounced even against the persecutor, or one
who does any injury, and no thought of counterinjury should be entertained against him.
Out of pride of attainment in the path of
Devotion, benedictions should not be pronounced
in words, such as, iMay God restore you to healthi,
iMay God remove your distressi, iMay God grant
you a long lifei, etc.

210

In correspondence also, words of worldly interest
should not be written. In Maraward society, there
is a general custom of writing such words of worldly
import in the form of prayer to God for obtaining
worldly objects e.g., iGod is our helper here and
elsewherei, iGod will advance our salesi, iGod
will bring a good monsooni, iGod will remove
the ailmenti, etc. Instead of this, auspicious,
disinterested words, such as, iGod in His state of
Bliss exists everywherei, iPerformance of Bhajana
is the essence of everythingi, etc., should be written
and other than these no word of worldly interest
should be written or uttered.

(C) Renunciation of Indolence and
Desire in Connection with the
Worship of Celestials
There is Godis instruction to offer worship to
the celestials, who are worthy of being worshipped,
during the time appointed for such worship,
according to the scriptures as well as tradition.
Regarding the carrying out of Godis instruction
as oneis supreme duty, such worship should be
offered to a celestial with enthusiasm, according
to the prescribed rules, without expression of any

211

desire for the satisfaction of any worldly interest.
With the object of such worship, words
implying worldly interest should not be written
on the cash-book, and other books of account.
For instance, in Maraward society there is a custom
on the New Year or Ddwald day, after the worship
of Goddess Lakmd, to write many words implying
worldly desire, such as, iGoddess Lakmd will bring
profiti, iThe store will be kept fulli, iProsperity
and success will be broughti, iUnder the protection
of Goddess Kaldi, iUnder the protection of Goddess
Gangai, etc. These should be substituted by
unselfish, auspicious words, such as, ird
Lakmdnarayafia, in the form of Bliss, is present
everywherei, or iGoddess Lakmd has been
worshipped with great delight and enthusiasm.i
Similarly, while writing the daily cash-book, this
procedure should be followed.

(D) Renunciation of Indolence and
Desire in the Service of Parents
and other Elders
It is manis supreme duty to render daily services,
in all possible ways, to parents, the preceptor, and
other persons who are oneis superior in Varfia,
Arama, age, qualifications, or in whatever other

212

respect it may be, and daily offer them obeisances.
Cultivating this thought in the mind, and
abandoning all idleness, disinterested, enthusiastic,
and according to Godis behests, services should
be rendered to them.

(E) Renunciation of Indolence and
Desire in the Performance of
Sacrifices, Charities, Austerities
and other Auspicious Deeds
Sacrifices, e. g., the daily obligatory five Great
Sacrifices*, and other occasional sacrifices, should
be performed. Through gifts of food, clothing,
learning, medicine, and wealth, etc., attempt should
be made, according to oneis capacity, to make all
creatures happy, through mind, speech and the
body. Similarly, all forms of bodily suffering should
be undergone for the preservation of Dharma. These
* The five Great Sacrifices are as follows:o(1) Sacrifice
to gods (performance of Agnihotra, etc.); (2) Sacrifice to
Ris (study of the Vedas, performance of Sandhya and Japa
of Gayatrd, etc.); (3) Sacrifice to the Manes (performance
of Tarpafia, raddha etc.); (4) Sacrifice to Men (entertainment
of guests); (5) Sacrifice to all created beings (performance
of Balivaivadeva).

213

duties enjoined by the scriptures should be
performed, with faith and enthusiasm, according
to Godis behests, regarding them as supremely
important, wholly renouncing the desire for all
kinds of enjoyment of this world and the next.

(F) Renunciation of Indolence and Desire
in the Performance of proper Work
for Maintenance of the Family
through earning of Livelihood
It is Godis injunction that the family should
be maintained through service to the world by
performing duties laid down in the scriptures for
the respective Varfias and Aramas, even as
agriculture, cattle-breeding and trade have been
laid down as the works of livelihood for the
Vaiya. Therefore, regarding them as duties,
treating profit and loss as equal, and renouncing
all forms of desire such works should be
enthusiastically performed.*
* Works performed by a person in the above spirit,
being freed from greed, cannot be tainted by evil in anyway,
for in works of livelihood greed is the particular cause
which leads one to the commission of sin. Therefore, just as
Vaiyas have been advised at length to give up evil practices

214

(G) Renunciation of Indolence and
Desirein Work for Preservation
of the Body
In work for preservation of the body, according
to the scriptures, e.g., pertaining to food, dress,
medicines etc., the desire for enjoyment should
be renounced. They should be performed, according
to the needs of the occasion, only with the object
of God-realization, regarding pleasure and pain,
profit and loss, life and death as equal.
Together with the four types of renunciation
stated above, when according to this fifth type of
renunciation, all evils and all forms of desire are
destroyed, and there remains only the one strong
desire for God-realization, it should be regarded
as the mark of the person, who has attained ripeness
in the first stage of Wisdom.
connected with trade in the footnote of the Hindi
rendering of Chapter XVIII verse 44 of the edition of the
Gdta published by the Gita Press, Gorakhpur, even so men
should renounce all forms of evil connected with their
respective duties as laid down by the Varfiarama system,
and perform all their duties, for Godis sake, disinterestedly,
regarding them as injunctions of God.

215

(6) Total Renunciation of the Sense
of Meum and Attachment with
regard to all Worldly objects
and Activities
All worldly objects like wealth, house, clothes,
etc., all relations like the wife, child, friends, etc.,
and all forms of enjoyment of this world and the
next like honour, fame, prestige, etc., being transient
and perishable, and regarding them as impermanent,
the sense of meum and attachment with regard to
them should be renounced. Similarly, having
developed pure, exclusive Love for God alone,
the embodiment of Existence, Knowledge and
Bliss, all sense of meum and attachment should
be renounced for all work done through the mind,
speech and body, and even for the body itself.
This is the sixth type of renunciation.*
* The renunciation of thirst, as well as the renunciation
of the desire for fruit, with regard to all objects and activities,
have been described above as the third and fifth types of
renunciation, but even after such renunciation the sense
of meum and attachment for them are left as residues; just
as even though Bharata Muni through practices of Bhajana
and meditation and cultivation of Satsanga, had renounced
all thirst and desire for fruit with regard to all objects and

216

Men who reach the stage of this sixth form of
renunciation, developing dispassion for all things
of the world, get exclusive Love for God alone,
the supreme embodiment of Love. Therefore, they
retiring to a solitaty place, like only to hear, and
talk about, the stories of Godis spotless Love, which
reveal the virtues, glory and secrets of God, and
reflect on the same, and practise Bhajana,
meditation and study of the scriptures. They
develop a distaste for wasting even a moment of
their valuable time in the company of men attached
to the world and indulging in laughter, luxury,
carelessness, backbiting, enjoyments, and idle talks.
They perform all their duties reflecting on Godis
Form and Name, only for Godis sake, and without
any worldly attachment.
Thus through renunciation of the sense of meum
and attachment with regard to all objects and
activities, development of pure Love for God alone,
activities, his sense of meum and attachment for the deer
and protection of the deer remained. That is why
renunciation of the sense of meum and attachment for all
objects and activities has been described as the sixth type
of renunciation.

217

the embodiment of Existence, Knowledge, and
Bliss, should be regarded as the mark of one who
has attained ripeness in the second stage of
Wisdom.

(7) Total Renunciation of subtle Desires
and Egotism with regard to the
World, the Body and all Actions
All objects of the world being creations of
Maya, are wholly transient, and one God alone,
the embodiment of Existence, Knowledge, and
Bliss equally and completely pervades everywhere,
this idea having been firmly established, all subtle
desires with regard to objects of the world, including
the body, and every form of activity have to be
totally renounced. In other words, there should
be no pictures of them in the mind in the form
of impressions. And due to total lack of
identification with the body, there should be no
trace of any sense of doership with regard to all
actions done through the mind, speech and body.
This is the seventh type of renunciation.*
* Even when there is total negation of thirst, of the
desire for fruit, of the sense of meum and attachment with

218

The mental impulses of persons, who attain
Supreme Dispassion1 in the form of this seventh
type of renunciation, get totally withdrawn from
all objects of the world. If at any time any worldly
impulse makes its appearance, the impression does
not get firmly established, for exclusive and close
union of such persons with Vasudeva, the
Paramatma the embodiment of Existence,
Knowledge and Bliss, constantly remains intact.
Therefore, in his mind, all defects and
vices having ceased to exist virtues like Ahihsa2,
regard to all objects of the world and all forms of activity,
there remain subtle desire and feeling of doership as residues.
That is why renunciation of subtle desire and egotism has
been described as the seventh type of renunciation.
1. In the person, who has reached the sixth stage of
renunciation stated above, there may be, now and then,
some slight manifestation of attachment, when there is
any special contact with objects of enjoyment; but in the
person, who has reached the seventh stage of renunciation,
there can be no attachment, even when there is contact
with objects of enjoyment for in his conception, except
God, no other object remains. That is why this renunciation
has been described as Supreme Dispassion.
2. Non-infliction of suffering on any creature through
mind, speech and the body.

219

Truth1, Non-Stealing2, Continence3, Abstaining from
vilification4, Modesty, Unhaughtiness5, Artlessness,
Purity6, Contentment7, Endurance8, Satsanga,
Spirit of Service, Sacrifice, Charity, Austerity9,
Study10, Mind-control, Sense-control, Humility,
1. Statement of facts in sweet words, representing exactly
what is realized by the mind and the senses.
2. Total lack of theft.
3. Lack of eight forms of sexual enjoyment.
4. Not to make any damaging statement against anybody.
5. Want of desire for reception, honour, public address
etc.
6. Both external and internal purity. (Truthful and pure
means of earning gives purity to wealth; food obtained
by that wealth imparts purity to food; proper behaviour
is purity of conduct; purification of the body through use
of water, earth, etc.oall this is called external purity.
Through destruction of modifications like attraction,
repulsion, and deception, etc., when the mind becomes
transparent and pure, it is called internal purity.)
7. What of thirst for worldly things.
8. Bearing contradictory experiences like heat and cold,
pleasure and pain, etc.
9. Sufferings undergone for the practice of oneis own
Dharma.
10. Study of the Vedas and other elevating scriptures
and practice of Kdrtana of Godis Name and glory.

220

Straightness1, Compassion, Faith2, Discrimination3,
Dispassion4, Living in seclusion, Poverty5, Lack
of doubt and distraction, Cessation of Desires,
Personal Magnetism6, Forgiveness7, Patience8,
Absence of malice9, Fearlessness10, Pridelessness,
1. This means straightness of the body and mind,
together with the senses.
2. Belief, as strong as in things directly perceived, in
the Vedas, in the scriptures and in the sayings of saints,
the preceptor and God.
3. Real knowledge about what is true and what is false.
4. Total lack of attachment for anything belonging to
any region up to Brahmaloka.
5. Want of accumulation of wealth with the sense of
meum.
6. It is that power of superior souls under the influence
of which even wicked, worldly minded men generally
abstain from sinful conduct and engage themselves in
virtuous deeds according to their behests.
7. Lack of desire to inflict any form of punishment on
one who does an injury.
8. Not to get upset even in the face of the greatest
difficulty.
9. Not to bear malice even against one who is
maliciously disposed.
10. Total absence of fear.

221

Peace*, Exclusive Devotion to God, etc., naturally
make their appearance.
Thus through the total lack of desire and egotism
in regard to all objects, including the body, constant
maintenance intact of identity with God is the
mark of the person who has attained ripeness in
the third stage of Wisdom.
Some of the virtues mentioned above appear
in the first and second stages, but all the virtues
make their appearance generally in the third stage.
For these are the marks of persons, who have reached
very near God-realization, and are the means of
attainment of direct knowledge of God. That is
why in Chapter XIII of the Gdta (verses 7 to 11)
Bhagavan rd Kaefia enumerated most of these
virtues as Knowledge and in Chapter XVI (verses
1 to 3) described them as the divine qualities.
Moreover, the scriptural authorities regard these
virtues as the common Dharma of humanity. All
men are entitled to them. Therefore, depending
on God, all should make special effort to develop
* Total absence of desires and cravings and
maintenance of constant cheerfulness in the mind.

222

the above virtues in their mind.

Conclusion
In this article it has been said that God may
be realized through seven types of renunciation.
Among them, it has been stated that, the first five
types of renunciation indicate the first stage of
Wisdom, renunciations up to the sixth type
indicate the marks of the second stage of Wisdom,
and renunciations up to the seventh type indicate
the marks of the third stage of Wisdom. He, who
attains ripeness in the third stage of Wisdom above,
at once realizes God, the embodiment of Existence,
Knowledge and Bliss. Thereafter he loses all
connection with this transient, destructible,
impermanent world. Just as the person awakened
from a dream loses all connection with the dreamworld, even so the person awakened from the dream
of ignorance loses all connection with the
impermanent world, the creation of Maya. Though
from the point of view of the world, all forms of
activities are observed as taking place through
the body of that person under the force of Prarabdha,
and the world gains a lot by such activities, for

223

being freed from desires, attachment and the sense
of doership, whatever the Mahatma does through
his mind, speech and body becomes the standard
of right conduct in the world, and from the ideas
of such a Mahatma scriptures are formed, yet that
person, who has realized Vasudeva, the
embodiment of Existence, Knowledge and Bliss,
lives wholly beyond Maya, consisting of the three
Gufias. Therefore, he during illumination, activity
and sleep, etc., which are the effect of the Gufias,
does not hate them, nor, when they cease, desires
for them. For, with regard to pleasure and pain,
gain and loss, honour and ignominy, praise and
blame, etc., and with regard to earth, stone and
gold, etc., he attains an attitude of equanimity.
Therefore, that Mahatma when obtaining a
desirable object, or in the cessation of what is
undesirable, does not feel delighted, nor does he
feel any grief when obtaining an undesirable object,
or in the loss of what is dear or desirable. If for
any reason, his body is cut by a weapon or he is
faced with any other form of extreme suffering,
that man of wisdom, established exclusively in

224

God, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and
Bliss, does not fall from that state of existence.
For in his mind, the whole world appears as a
mirage, and no other existence appears to him
beyond the existence of one God, the embodiment
of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss. What more should
we say about him; the state of that soul, who has
realized God, the embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss, is in reality, known to him
alone. None possesses the power to reveal it
through the mind, intellect and senses. Therefore,
awakening as soon as possible from the sleep of
ignorance, and taking shelter under the care of a
saint, and according to his instructions, one should
earnestly take to the practice of a discipline for
realizing God through the seven types of
renunciation stated above. For this extremely
valuable human life is attained, only through the
grace of God, at the end of many births. Therefore,
the invaluable time allotted to this life should
not be wasted in indulging in the perishable,
transient, impermanent enjoyments of this world.

Z

